I am pleased to announce an exciting new initiative at Rensselaer:
Each academic year, beginning this year, we will select a theme for
the entire Rensselaer community to explore together.

This academic year, we begin with the theme of "resilience." During
the President's Commencement Colloquy last May, I invited our four
honorands to engage in a discussion about "Resilient Leadership for a
Resilient World."  The complexity of the challenges the world faces
today requires new models of collaboration---across disciplies,
sectors, and geographic regions.  In an increasingly inter-connected
world, where intersecting vulnerabilities can lead to cascading
consequences, resilience---in our infrastructure, our institutions,
our civic and personal lives, and in our leaders---is more important
than ever.

As we enter the Fall 2015 semester, we are launching a series of
programs, courses, and events that will help us to identify the ways
in which all of us can build such resilience into our lives, into the
physical world that surrounds us, and into our social structures.

Faculty in each of the schools will be exploring the topic of
resilience, its application within their disciplines, and its
relevance across interdisciplinary boundaries. Student Life programs
will help our students to investigate the meaning of resilience as an
individual, as a member of a team, and as a leader.  Through
workshops, lectures, concerts, projects, and guided discussions, we
will engage the entire Rensselaer community in a collaborative
exploration.

To begin, we have chosen the book Authentic Happiness by Martin
E.P. Seligman, Ph.D., as a common read for the academic year. This
book, which we have provided to each first-year student, is
accompanied by a website hosted by the University of Pennsylvania:
https://www.authentichappiness.sas.upenn.edu/.

We soon will be announcing a number of exciting events around the
topic of resilience, both on and off of the campus.  We hope that you
will join a lively and inspiring exchange, and help us build a
new---and hopefully---long-standing, Rensselaer tradition, as we
continue to ask: why not change the world






I am pleased to announce an exciting new initiative at Rensselaer:
Beginning this year, we will cultivate our vision of The New
Polytechnic, and of Rensselaer as a great collaborative endeavor, in
part by selecting a theme for the entire Rensselaer community to
consider together over the course of the academic year.

Our inaugural theme is "resilience." During the President's
Commencement Colloquy last May, I invited our four honorands to
deliberate on "Resilient Leadership for a Resilient World," because
the complexity of the challenges the world faces requires not only new
models of collaboration, but new models of resilience as well:
personal resilience, resilience in our infrastructure and
institutions, and in our civic life---all of which rest on resilient
leadership.

As we enter the Fall 2015 semester, we carry forward this theme with
the launch of a series of programs, events, and courses that will help
us to identify the ways in which all of us can build such resilience
into our lives, into the physical world that surrounds us, and into
our social structures.

Rensselaer faculty and staff will embed resilience into curricular and
co-curricular activities for all students. Faculty in each of the
schools will be exploring the topic, its application within their
disciplines, and its relevance across interdisciplinary
boundaries. Student Life programs will help our students to
investigate the meaning of resilience as individuals, as members of a
team, and as leaders.

Workshops, lectures, concerts, projects, and team-building exercises
will offer the entire Rensselaer community food for thought about ways
to enhance our ability to thrive amidst upheaval and great challenges.

To begin, we have chosen the book Authentic Happiness by Martin
E.P. Seligman, Ph.D., as a common read for the academic year, and have
provided a copy to each student. This book is accompanied by a website
hosted by the University of Pennsylvania:
https://www.authentichappiness.sas.upenn.edu/.

We will soon announce more exciting events that will encourage
stimulating community conversations around our shared theme of
resilience. We hope that you will join, and enjoy, this fresh and
inspiring exchange.






I am pleased to share with you some information about an exciting new
plan of study at Rensselaer: the Summer Arch.

The Summer Arch explicitly encourages experiential learning and
professional development for all students through an academic plan of
study that focuses on three specific outcomes: enhanced
student-faculty interactions at a pivotal phase of the undergraduate
experience; pathways for students who wish to augment their academic
programs through the availability of a year-round academic calendar;
and flexibility in the academic schedule to enable all students to
explore their passions and interests in a way that positions them for
future success.

Summer Arch will be accompanied by new curricular and co-curricular
offerings at Rensselaer that cultivate the development of a global,
multicultural, and self- aware leader; a critical and creative
thinker; an exceptional communicator; and an inventive and
enterprising problem solver who is prepared to address the challenges
and opportunities faced by society.

Under the Summer Arch, rising juniors will attend a full summer
semester at Rensselaer between their sophomore and junior years,
followed by either a fall or a spring "away" semester. The "away"
semester allows students to take advantage of the numerous
co-curricular and experiential activities available off campus,
including international experiences, internships, co-ops, research
opportunities, and engagement in community service projects.

The Summer Arch is an important part of the transformational
experience we provide our students as we prepare the next generation
of leaders, and builds upon Clustered Learning, Advocacy, and Support
for Students, or CLASS -- Rensselaer's signature approach to the
student experience.

In 2017, Rensselaer will launch the first of two pilots of the Summer
Arch, and rising juniors (members of the Class of 2019) from the
School of Engineering and selected programs from the other Schools
will have the opportunity to stay on campus and participate in the
Summer Arch. In the summer of 2018, Rensselaer will launch the second
pilot, and rising juniors (members of the Class of 2020) enrolled in
all schools will have the opportunity to participate in the Arch. The
program will be a requirement for all members of the Class of 2021.

As we approach Rensselaer's third century of innovation and discovery,
we remain committed to educating the leaders of tomorrow. A Rensselaer
education, through our innovative pedagogy, global challenge-linked
research, and a transformative student experience, positions our
graduates truly to change the world. The Summer Arch reinforces and
strengthens that commitment.

As with any new initiative of such magnitude, there are still many
details to be finalized. The Office of the Provost, the Division of
Student Life, and other portfolios will be sharing additional
information as it becomes available. For now, please visit the Summer
Arch web page, (rpi.edu/summerarch) for more information.





Rensselaer values and respects the diversity of its faculty, staff,
and students-as such, the Institute seeks to accommodate the religious
beliefs and needs of the Rensselaer community.  This policy applies to
all employees, including faculty, staff, students, and members of the
President's Cabinet.

As a reminder, the Rensselaer policy on religious observances is as
follows:

Rensselaer is a nondenominational university that welcomes all faiths.

Therefore, Rensselaer will make all reasonable efforts to assure that
religious participation is not unreasonably restricted for any
employee or student who wishes to be absent from the workplace or
classroom on religious observances and holidays. In the case of
conflicts between the university calendar and an individual's
religious beliefs, Institute leaders are expected to make arrangements
to assure that religious participation of our students, faculty, and
staff is not unreasonably restricted.

Staff may request Paid Time Off (PTO) and faculty may request
scheduled time off for a religious holiday or observance by contacting
their immediate supervisor. Students may request, from their
professors and instructors, time off for a religious holiday or
observance.

For information on our policy, faculty and staff can obtain specific
information in Section 600.6, Religious Accommodations of the Human
Resources Policy Guidelines at:
http://www.rpi.edu/dept/hr/policy/HRPolicySection600.pdf.

Students can obtain additional information in the 2015-2016 Rensselaer
Catalog, Academic Information and Regulations - Class Attendance and
Examinations: http://catalog.rpi.edu/.

I sincerely appreciate your cooperation in our ongoing efforts to
reasonably accommodate our faculty, staff, and students' religious
observances and beliefs






I write to inform you of the resignation of Mr. David Brond as vice
president for strategic communications and external relations,
effective June 12, 2015. Mr. Brond has accepted a position as Director
of Account Services for Aloysius Butler & Clark Creative Intelligence
in Wilmington, Delaware.

The position of Vice President for Strategic Communications and
External Relations is responsible for advancing public understanding
and advocacy for Rensselaer, its educational opportunities and
research discoveries, and its growing position of importance in
science, technology, and public policy.  As such, we will be
commencing a national search for a vice president for strategic
communications and external relations.

On behalf of the Board of Trustees, members of the Cabinet, faculty,
and staff, I extend to Mr. Brond the best wishes in his new position





For individuals, families, and friends from Nepal and neighboring
countries, I would like to let you know that my thoughts are with you
in the wake of the deadly earthquake that struck on April 25. With the
estimated number of victims continuing to grow, people across the
world, including the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute community, are
grieving.

Rensselaer is a university with global reach and global impact. In
times like this, we also want to share our concern and condolences to
all students, faculty, staff, and alumni and alumnae who have ties to
the impacted regions in Nepal.

It comes as no surprise to me that concerned students have expressed
interest in supporting relief efforts. Alpha Phi Omega, a co-ed
service fraternity, will be collecting cash donations for UNICEF at
the Rensselaer Student Union from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. today.

In addition, RPI Relief, a program of the Dean of Students Office that
supports disaster relief efforts worldwide, is planning a series of
fundraisers through May 13. All funds will be donated to the following
organizations: UNICEF Children's Fund, Nepal Red Cross, and All Hands
Volunteers. Plans are also underway to host a fundraiser event titled
Climb for Nepal on May 8. For more information, visit the Dean of
Students website at doso.rpi.edu.

Established in August 2005, RPI Relief is a student-led program of the
Dean of Students Office, activated to raise awareness, raise funds,
and coordinate volunteer initiatives when disaster strikes an
area. Past RPI Relief efforts have included student initiatives to
support those impacted by Hurricane Katrina, and the earthquakes and
tsunamis in southeast Asia, Pakistan, Turkey, Haiti, and Japan.

This tragedy may be disruptive to members of our campus
community. Rensselaer has many resources available to students,
faculty, and staff who need assistance and support. Students should
contact the Counseling Center at (518) 276-6479, and assistance is
available to faculty and staff through the Employee Assistance Program
at (518) 465-3813. More information can be found at our student health
center website.

I am always proud, at times like these, when our university community
rallies together to show its support and concern for the welfare of
others





I would like to invite the Rensselaer community to join me for the
2015 Spring Town Meeting this afternoon at 1:00 p.m. in the EMPAC
Theater.  A question and answer session will follow the presentation,
and refreshments will be served following the Town Meeting




I am pleased to announce that I have appointed Jonathan D. Wexler,
Vice President for Enrollment Management at Fairleigh Dickinson
University, as Vice President for Enrollment Management, effective
July 15, 2015.

In his role at Rensselaer, Mr. Wexler will assume responsibility for
setting long- and short-range strategies for the Office of Enrollment
Management in the recruitment of undergraduate, full and part-time
graduate, and international students, for both the Troy and Hartford
campuses. In addition, Mr. Wexler will oversee the Office of Financial
Aid.

"I am honored to have been selected to lead the enrollment management
division at a premier national institution such as Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute," Wexler said. "I look forward to working with
President Jackson, academic and administrative leaders, faculty,
staff, students, and alumni and alumnae in continuing to build on the
outstanding academic reputation of Rensselaer and the pursuit of
accomplishing the goals outlined in The Rensselaer Plan 2024."

Mr. Wexler currently oversees the offices of Undergraduate, Graduate,
International, and Adult Part-Time Undergraduate Admissions, as well
as Financial Aid, on the two primary campuses of Fairleigh Dickinson
University. Under his leadership, enrollment for the incoming fall
2015 freshman class reached the highest level in the history of the
university. Additionally, the fall 2015 freshman class has been the
strongest academically accomplished class on record in the
university's history.

Prior to assuming his current role at Fairleigh Dickinson University,
Mr. Wexler served as Associate Vice President for Enrollment at the
University of Puget Sound, Dean of Undergraduate Admissions at
Polytechnic University, and Director of Graduate Recruitment at Drexel
University.

Mr. Wexler received a master's degree in higher education
administration from the University of South Carolina, and a dual
bachelor's degree in political science and communications from Goucher
College





In 1994, through the generosity of several members of the Board of
Trustees and at the direction of the President, the Trustees'
Outstanding Teacher Award was established.  This award, which is given
annually, recognizes outstanding accomplishments in classroom
instruction and consists of a $10,000 honorarium.

The selection will be made based on evidence of sustained outstanding
teaching as reflected by student evaluations from the last two years,
peer evaluations, and letters of support from colleagues, alumni, and
students.

The selection committee will consist of the following individuals:

 Prabhat Hajela, Provost (Committee Chair)

 Mike Hanna, Associate Dean of Undergraduate Education and Associate
 Professor of Biology

 Charles Carletta, Secretary of the Institute and General Counsel

 Mark Mistur, Associate Professor of Architecture and winner of the
 2014 Trustees' Award

 Kyle Keraga, Grand Marshal

They will be charged with making a recommendation to the President who
will make the final selection.  All nominations will remain in effect
for two years and should include the following information:

 1) Letter of Nomination
 2) Curriculum Vitae
 3) Letters of support from alumni, students, colleagues, and/or
    administrators

Individual faculty or students are invited to submit nominations no
later than 5:00 p.m. Tuesday, February 24, 2015 to Prabhat Hajela,
Provost.  The Office of the Provost will solicit the student
evaluation material from the appropriate department and/or school for
all nominations received









Welcome to the Class of 2019 (and the architects of 2020). We are so very glad that you are here, and the entire Rensselaer family looks forward to getting to know you better.

We have chosen each of you because we know you will thrive at Rensselaer. We are very good at selecting precisely those extremely creative, extremely focused young women and men who not only will benefit most from our atmosphere of exploration, innovation, and discovery—but who will contribute to the excitement that is Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Tomorrow, you will attend your first college classes. If you feel intimidated at any moment, I recommend that you take a deep breath, and that you remember our great confidence in you.

Please allow me to introduce my team—those people who lead and support others to ensure that Rensselaer offers you every possible opportunity to learn and to grow—the President’s Cabinet:

Prabhat Hajela, our Provost;
Charles Carletta, Secretary of the Institute and General Counsel;
Elisha Mozersky, Chief of Staff, and Associate Vice President for Policy and Planning;
Jonathan Dordick, Vice President for Research;
Virginia Gregg, Vice President for Finance and Chief Financial Officer;
John Kolb ’79, Vice President for Information Services and Technology, and Chief Information Officer;
Jonathan D. Wexler, Vice President for Enrollment Management;
Curtis Powell, Vice President for Human Resources;
Claude Rounds, Vice President for Administration;
Frank E. Ross III, Vice President for Student Life; and
Graig R. Eastin, Vice President for Institute Advancement.
Please allow me, also, to introduce our academic deans:

Professor Shekhar Garde, Dean of the School of Engineering;
Professor Curt Breneman, Dean of the School of Science;
Professor Evan Douglis, Dean of the School of Architecture;
Professor Mary Simoni, Dean of the School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences;
Professor Thomas Begley, Dean of the Lally School of Management;
Professor Stanley Dunn, Vice Provost and Dean of Graduate Education;
Professor Linda Schadler, Vice Provost and Dean of Undergraduate Education.
Their efforts and imagination undergird life at Rensselaer inside and outside the classroom, so let us acknowledge and thank them...

The imaginative people Rensselaer has educated have founded great companies such as Texas Instruments, invented life-enhancing technologies such as the digital camera and networked email, and sequenced the first complete genome of a free-living organism.

Research into the process of creativity suggests that creative people tend to have more complex personalities than others—able to be both playful and disciplined, patiently willing to absorb the intellectual tradition of their fields, but willing, also, to take great risks in breaking with tradition. We will help you to unlock your creativity, and to become large people in every sense—to understand that you possess multitudes of capabilities. We will help you to explore courageously across disciplines, in order to discover new possibilities, as well as to collaborate with others whose manner of seeing and thinking will open your apertures.

We will educate you for deep knowledge in your chosen domains—and for much more than that. Revolutions enabled by technology are now commonplace in almost every field of human endeavor, so the specific skills you will gain at Rensselaer matter less in the long term than your developing fruitful, productive habits of mind. We will help you to acquire the resilience required to find opportunities in times of change and uncertainty.

We believe that the qualities that will make you resilient include the intellectual agility to see new possibilities, the multicultural sophistication to collaborate with people whose perspectives are different from yours, and the global view to add a sense of great purpose to your work.

Indeed, given the grand challenges humanity faces, the world itself needs to develop resilience in its physical infrastructure and in its social structures. We have chosen “Resilient Leadership for a Resilient World” as a theme for consideration by the entire Rensselaer community this year. And we have re-envisioned the university as The New Polytechnic—a great crossroads for creative people from all disciplines, sectors, and global regions—who, working together, use the most advanced tools and technologies to address the grand challenges. It is at the juncture of different domains, and at the meeting of different perspectives and cultures, where audacious new ideas are born, that change the world.

To begin, we already have introduced you, through Navigating Rensselaer & Beyond, to the fellow members of your class. Together, you make up one of the most diverse classes in our history, with the greatest number of women, underrepresented minorities, and international students.

Navigating Rensselaer & Beyond is the first step in Clustered Learning, Advocacy, and Support for Students, or CLASS, which will define your student experience as you progress through the university. It will offer you opportunity and support in time- (or developmentally-based) and residentially-based clusters—in order to develop your professional and leadership skills.

Our approach to teaching and learning encourages your engagement with new perspectives—and an awareness of the patterns of thought common to very different fields.

Key to this is our new Art_X @ Rensselaer initiative, which is intended to fire your imaginations by helping you to see, not merely the ways that art employs science and technology, but also the art in science, and the science in art. For example, the wings of a butterfly are built on a scaffold, with coloring that reflects and enables the functionality of those wings. We want to help you to explore form, function, patterns, processes, dimensionality, and relatedness across all disciplines—and to see that whether you intend to be an scientist, engineer, entrepreneur, artist, or architect, the journey into the unknown is largely the same, and to be unafraid of creative crossover.

Art_X will encourage you to discover and create in new ways, along new dimensions. You will see this in the design classes in our School of Engineering which will require not just considerations such as function, budget, safety, and performance—but also aesthetics.

Of course, aesthetics are obviously crucial everywhere that there are interfaces of the human with technology or the physical world. Aesthetics have import in more abstract disciplines, as well. Consider this thought from Nobel Prize-winning theoretical physicist Steven Weinberg, who has written, “The history of physics provides many illustrations of the rather spooky fact that something as personal and subjective as our sense of the beautiful helps us not only to invent physical theories, but even to judge the validity of those theories.” In other words, if a theory lacks symmetry—or the ability to be applied to very different frames of reference—it is likely to be faulty. In fact, I employed symmetry in the form of Lie Groups in research related to my Ph.D. thesis. The laws of nature are beautiful, and through Art_X, we will teach you to appreciate them in a deeper way. That appreciation often comes from research.

Therefore, we encourage you, as well, to participate in research that breaks new ground within disciplines, and across disciplines.

But, I must tell you about the Summer Arch, which will be available, for the first time, as an option for certain members of your class, and will offer even more freedom to pursue new possibilities. The students in your class who choose Summer Arch will spend the summer after their sophomore year in classes here at Rensselaer—and then leave campus for a semester during their junior year—in order to work, to volunteer, to invent, or to explore anywhere around the globe.

My fundamental message is this: We lead meaningful lives at Rensselaer. We discover and innovate in order to change the world—and, because of it, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is a place of great excitement and joy. Now, you are part of it, and will help to carry on the great lineage of this very special place.

We know that you will add to our excitement, joy, and continued achievements, and tomorrow you begin. I hope that it is a very good day for each and every one of you, and the start of a great freshman year.

Thank you











Welcome, everyone. It is my great pleasure to be here to honor you for devoting to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute many years of your careers.

This evening, we recognize 202 individuals, current as well as retired Rensselaer employees, whose combined service totals a remarkable 3,513 years.

In addition to those being honored for 5, 10, and 15 years of service—we have 80 employees and retirees being honored for 20 years or more of service. This includes 9 current employees who are arriving at their 40th anniversary. We are grateful for the time that you have given to Rensselaer.

I express my personal thanks, also, to some of the people with whom I work most closely:

Prabhat Hajela, Provost, whom we honor for his 25 years of service;
Curtis Powell, Vice President for Human Resources; Shekhar Garde, Dean of the School of Engineering; and Karyl Contois, House Manager in the Office of the President, all of whom we honor for 15 years of service;
John Alaskey, Executive Protection Specialist in the Office of the President, who has been with us for 10 years; and
Evan Douglis, Dean of the School of Architecture, whom we honor for 5 years of service.
I mention them, and I commend all of you here tonight for your commitment to Rensselaer. All of you have treated your occupations, as callings. And the distinction between the two has the power to move mountains.

Fifteen years ago, I presented The Rensselaer Plan to the Board of Trustees for approval; it was guided by three fundamental markers: excellence, leadership, and community.

The people in this room have so embodied those qualities that, today, as we approach the third century of our history, we are preparing ourselves to be newly transformative in the world: in research with global reach and global impact, in our pedagogical innovation, and in the lives of the talented young men and women we educate at Rensselaer.

It is your hard work and your creativity that allow the Institute to realize its grand ambitions, as we re-envision ourselves as The New Polytechnic—a great crossroads where people meet from all disciplines, sectors, and geographical regions, and use advanced tools and technologies to address significant global challenges.

The essence of The New Polytechnic is creative partnerships among people with very different skills, but with a profound sense of a common purpose—a determination, in fact, to take on the hardest problems, and to improve the greatest possible number of lives.

All of you embody The New Polytechnic, in that each of you undergirds and contributes to such potentially transformative endeavors as The Jefferson Project at Lake George, or our new Cognitive and Immersive Systems Laboratory @ EMPAC, or Art _X@Rensselaer—whether you serve in the Division of Administration, or Division of the Chief Information Officer, the Office of the President, or the Division of Student Life.

Collectively, you make this a wonderful—and beautiful—place to live, to learn, to research, to visit, to collaborate—and to grow into a confident adult well prepared to innovate, to discover, and to lead. As you know, we challenge our students, “Why not change the world?” The employees of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute change the world every day, each in his or her own way.

Please accept my boundless appreciation and gratitude for all that you do.

Thank you









Good afternoon. As President of Rensselaer, it is my pleasure, and my honor, to welcome you into the Rensselaer family.

Thank you, Dr. Ross, for your introduction. Dr. Ross is our new Vice President for Student Life. He joins us from Northeastern Illinois University, where he served as Vice President for Student Affairs. Over his 20-year career in university administration, and with his expertise in professional practice and research, Dr. Ross has received many awards and much recognition. So your students are in very able hands.

I trust that moving in went well for your young people. All of us at Rensselaer are looking forward to getting to know your students better. We are well aware of how remarkable they are.

Now, we will prepare them to seize opportunity, and to lead in a world that truly needs their leadership. As we look to the future, and the role your students will play, two factors are paramount. First, we do face enormous challenges, interconnected and global, affecting economies worldwide. There is always opportunity in challenges if we approach them in the right way. Collaboration across borders of all kinds is required – disciplinary, geographic, cultural, political, and economic.

Second, revolutions enabled by technology are now par for the course in nearly every field of endeavor. These developments offer the opportunity for addressing challenges of all kinds, and, importantly, the opportunity for wonderful careers.

What does all this mean for Rensselaer as a university, and for your young people? Rensselaer is the embodiment of The New Polytechnic—a great crossroads for collaboration among brilliant people from everywhere, addressing the great challenges, seizing the great opportunities, enabled by the most advanced tools and technologies.
These factors shape the education we offer at Rensselaer—The New Polytechnic—in this way: Of course we will educate your students for mastery in their chosen domains, even as we know that, in the long term, mastery in any field is likely to be an ever-moving target. This requires our students to be lifelong learners, and philomaths. It is important that they develop both intellectual and social resilience, and a readiness to perceive opportunities in uncertain times.

Therefore, we have made “resilient leadership” a theme that the entire Rensselaer community will be considering this year, inside and outside of the classroom, within our students’ coursework, in their residence halls, in our leadership programs, and in co-curricular programs, including the speakers we invite to campus. As a first step towards developing personal resilience, we have asked your students to read Authentic Happiness, by Dr. Martin Seligman, Zellerbach Family Professor of Psychology and Director of the Positive Psychology Center at the University of Pennsylvania.

Dr. Seligman makes a distinction between “talents” and “strengths.” Talents, such as a facility for math, or an ear for music, or an ability to run fast, are largely innate – although they can be honed. Strengths, however, such as fairness, empathy, courage, or a sense of purpose, require an exercise of will.

Rensselaer selected the members of the Class of 2019 for their ample talents. Each of them rose to the top of an extremely competitive admissions process. The Class of 2019 includes…

78 high school valedictorians or salutorians;
158 with a perfect 800 SAT score in reading, writing, or math;
36 captains of athletic teams—and nearly half of the class participated in high school sports.
We have many musicians, including a student who has performed at Carnegie Hall five times, as well as a fascinating array of entrepreneurs, philanthropists, and inventors.

Now, as we see it, key qualities for success in the future include the intellectual agility to embrace the unfamiliar, to see new possibilities, and to connect ideas in new ways; the multicultural sophistication that enables fruitful collaborations and friendships; and a global view that prompts your students to consider the broadest implications of the work they will do, and to find the highest purpose within it. Your young people came to us with the ability to develop these attributes.

We will build on the talents of the Class of 2019, and of course, the strengths they have developed from how you raised them. They come to us, having been at the top in many, many things. Now they will be “thrown” in with others who were at the top wherever they came from – from around the world, in fact. This can be daunting.
This can be overcome by their simply connecting with their fellow students as the first step towards developing intellectual agility, multicultural sophistication, and a global view, since we have assembled one of the most diverse classes in our 191-year history, including a record number of women students, under-represented minority students, and international students.

Our comprehensive approach to the student experience at Rensselaer—Clustered Learning Advocacy and Support for Students, or CLASS—will help to foster these attributes—by offering the kind of support that encourages intellectual and personal exploration. This begins immediately, with Navigating Rensselaer & Beyond, our five-day program for freshmen that includes outdoor adventures, historical and cultural programs, and community service opportunities—all intended to allow these remarkable young people to meet, and to know they have come to the right place.

CLASS is predicated on clustering as the mechanism for student growth and transformation. The clustering is both residential and time-based. All first and second-year students live in tight-knit communities centered in their residence halls, with live-in Assistant Deans and a Faculty Dean of the Residential Commons. Some of our housing options draw students even closer, because they are based on common interests, such as our Leadership House and Design and Arts Housing.

Our students also are supported and connected through time-based clustering, with a Dean of the First-Year Experience, and then Class Deans who work with each undergraduate class from their sophomore through senior years. Time-based clustering allows us to offer opportunities for them—designed precisely for the stage they are at in their college careers, such as our Emerging Leaders Program for freshmen and the Sophomore Career Experience.

Ultimately, CLASS is really about encouraging talented young people to spread their wings, including offering them carefully considered occasions to lead. Down the line, your students may gain leadership skills by participating, for example, in our very successful peer mentoring program, in which upperclassmen take on groups of first-year students, and help them through foundational courses in math, physics, and chemistry.

And through both CLASS programming, and their academic experiences, we will build strengths by encouraging your students to lift their heads from their laptops and to think for themselves about the world around them.

I mentioned resilience earlier. In fact, resilience will be a theme in the “Inquiry” classes in our School of Humanities, the Arts, and Social Sciences.

Many other aspects of the Rensselaer pedagogy will encourage our freshmen to engage with new perspectives, and will help them to become aware of the patterns of thought common to very different fields, whether through DATUM— Data Analytics Through Undergraduate Mathematics—or through an even broader initiative—Art_X @ Rensselaer—is designed to help all of our students to see, and to use, the art in science and technology, and the science and technology in art. We want to help our students to explore form, function, patterns, processes, dimensionality, and relatedness across all disciplines. Art_X includes team-taught interdisciplinary classes—and encompasses the Jaffe Student Competition, which supports summer production residencies at EMPAC for projects proposed by students. Art_X also includes the incorporation of artistic concepts throughout the curriculum.

For example, the design classes in our School of Engineering required of all engineers now will examine beauty and grace as key design concepts. Our “Introduction to Engineering Design” course now emphasizes the relationship of—and sometimes conflict between—function and aesthetics. In the capstone design class taken by seniors in all engineering disciplines, students work in teams to design and build a product—trying to solve real problems. Now, the students will be asked to address not just considerations such as function, budget, safety, and performance—but also aesthetics.

Our direct teaching methods, too, are very innovative – interactive and technology-enabled. Using advances arising out of Rensselaer research, we employ tools such as multi-player mixed reality classes, the gamification of concepts, and interaction with artificially intelligent characters to speed learning. For example, in The Mandarin Project, which teaches the Chinese language and culture, your students will be immersed in that culture in virtual scenes such as in a Beijing tea house, within a semester-long narrative, that soon will include virtual characters arising from artificial intelligence research.

But, I must tell you about an even more transformative approach to our undergraduate education, which we will be phasing in over the next few years. Summer Arch, which will be available for the first time as an option for your students, will give Rensselaer students even more freedom to investigate new possibilities. The students in the Class of 2019 who choose Summer Arch will spend the summer after their sophomore year in junior-level classes here at Rensselaer—and then leave campus for a semester during their junior year—to work, to volunteer, to invent, or to explore anywhere in the globe.

The distinctive combination here of intellectual rigor —and great freedom to explore at the interstices between disciplines, where many discoveries and innovations are made—is at the root of where we are and why Rensselaer is recognized widely as a uniquely excellent institution.

Of course, while we anticipate that your children will fully embrace our approach and opportunity, take vigorous command of their own destinies, and ultimately, change the world, we recognize that they are still young. This is why we have the CLASS approach to living and learning at Rensselaer, so that our young people are embraced for who they are, are supported and feel safe as they grow and develop. As a parent myself, I also know that our young people still need the support of their families. We need you as partners. So, I urge you to join our Parents of Rensselaer organization. This group will help you to help us guide your student in his or her journey through college life. And please do not hesitate to call on the Office of the First-Year Experience for advice.

I look forward to getting to know all of you better over the next four years. I invite you to visit as often as you can. I hope you will return to Rensselaer for Family Weekend, October 23-25. I will end by showing you a video of some of the experiences your students already have enjoyed, and by inviting you afterwards to a reception outside at Evelyn’s Café.

But first, let me thank you for your confidence in us, in allowing your wonderful children to come to Rensselaer. We take very seriously our responsibility to keep them safe and happy. We will challenge them. And, we will take very good care of them—as they develop into the strong and capable adults you wish them to become.

And now, let us see how much fun they have been having














Thank you, Mr. Golden.

Arthur serves on the Board of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. I am very grateful for his service, because he always offers excellent advice. I am sure this audience already knows that! Of course, he is a Rensselaer alumnus, a member of the Rensselaer Class of 1966—so I would expect no less.

He has asked me to speak to you today about leadership, which I am certain is a very pertinent subject at Davis Polk. Clearly, everyone here today has either achieved leadership within the legal profession, or has demonstrated immense potential in that direction, in order to be hired by this very venerable and very distinguished firm.

I am a theoretical physicist, with an S.B. in Physics and a Ph.D. in Theoretical Elementary Particle Physics, both from MIT. You might assume that my path from a doctorate to the Presidency of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute was a straight one—but it was not.

As I see it, there are no linear paths in high-level careers. Even in those rare professions that resemble ladders, in which one climbs carefully delineated ranks to the top, there are always choices to be made, such as those involving marriage and children, and unexpected adversity to overcome, such as health issues—or people and situations that seek to rob you of your confidence.

One must demonstrate resilience, alertness to the wider world, and a willingness to take risks, in order to grow into a leader.

I have served in leadership positions in academia, government, research, and the corporate and financial sectors, and am pleased to share aspects of my own unique journey with you.

My path began with my parents, who taught their children the value of family and the power of education, with an emphasis on excellence and hard work. This prepared me to take advantage of opportunities that came with the convergence of two events. The first was the desegregation of the Washington, D.C., public schools in 1955, after the 1954 Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court decision, which guaranteed that I could attend the best schools, with excellent teachers, right in my own neighborhood. It also meant that I was exposed to, and competed against, a body of students from a broader array of ethnic, religious, cultural, and experiential backgrounds.

The second event occurred two years later, when the Soviet Union launched Sputnik I, the first artificial satellite, which also launched the “space race,” and spurred the United States to a new emphasis on mathematics and science in the public schools, from which I benefitted tremendously.

This background, my own interests, a vice principal’s advice, and my father’s encouragement led me to attend the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). There were challenges there, to be sure, as I was one of only two African American women in my freshman class, and the professors and students were not always welcoming to me.

For example, when I was thinking of majoring in physics and went to talk to a distinguished professor, in whose class I had the highest grades, he offered me some unexpected advice. “Colored girls,” he said, “should learn a trade.”

Naturally, I was hurt that his expectations for me were so limited. But, as I reflected, I realized that while my heritage was by chance—something I could not change, and would not if I could—success was a choice, and it would be my choice. I would learn “a trade,” and that trade was physics. Since I was interested most in the mathematical aspects of physics, I decided that I would be theoretical physicist.

By the way, I did so well in this professor’s class that, eventually, he offered me a job in his laboratory.

When I was a senior at MIT, deciding where to attend graduate school, and ready for a friendlier climate, the University of Pennsylvania invited me to visit. One of the physicists whose work most interested me was there.

After my visit, as I was leaving Penn, in April, 1968, in a car with my sorority sister, on my way to the Philadelphia airport, the radio broadcast was interrupted, and we learned that the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. had been shot. We nearly drove the car off the road.

By the time I got back to MIT, inspired by the courage and self-sacrifice of Dr. King, I knew that I would remain at MIT for graduate school.

Why? MIT had not been an easy place to live and learn. At that moment, MIT was not a leader in the condensed matter physics that most interested me. But I chose MIT over any other graduate school for one important reason: It was the place where I would have the greatest possible opportunity to change things for the better.

MIT needed more minority students, for its own sake—indeed, for the sake of the nation—and it needed to offer those young people a more welcoming experience. So, with a group of like-minded students, I formed the Black Students’ Union, and we presented ten proposals to the MIT administration. Provost Paul Gray, who later became President of MIT, listened, formed a Task Force on Educational Opportunity, and asked me to join it.

The Task Force accomplished a great deal, and MIT began to hire black administrators and faculty; to recruit minority students; and to initiate a six-week summer program called Project Interphase that helped to prepare incoming minority freshmen for the rigorous coursework they would encounter. Soon, the program was opened to all who needed it, and though I was still a student, I was asked to design the physics curriculum.

The African-American students I had helped to bring to MIT—and helped to adjust to its culture—excelled. They proved to the world that scientific and engineering talent is not restricted to one race, or one sex, or one story of origin.

Achieving this wonderful outcome required a degree of sacrifice on my part. I had to change my focus from condensed matter physics to nuclear and high energy physics—known as elementary particle physics. But because I made this choice, I became a leader—keenly attuned to policy questions, and questions of pedagogy, as well as to science.

After postdoctoral stints in elementary particle theory at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory and the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), I switched back to my first love—theoretical condensed matter physics, where there were more opportunities. I was convincing enough in my particle physics research, and the ways that it could relate to condensed matter problems, that I landed a limited term-appointment at the storied Bell Labs in New Jersey, which over its history has fostered 14 Nobel Prize winners among its researchers. My position became “permanent” a year and a half later.

After 15 wonderful years in research at Bell Labs, which included marriage and a child, I realized how much I enjoyed mentoring students, and when Rutgers University offered me a position as a tenured professor of physics, I accepted. An interest in science policy drew me, further, to a variety of state and professional advisory boards. I wanted science and technology better to serve the public realm, and I wanted public policy better to serve science and technology. In New Jersey, I held, successively, three gubernatorial appointments by three different governors. I was appointed by Governor Thomas Kean to the New Jersey Commission on Science & Technology (NJCAST), by Governor James Florio to the Rutgers Board of Governors, and by Governor Christine Todd Whitman to the New Jersey Economic Master Plan Commission. Though unpaid, two of the positions required New Jersey State Senate confirmation (NJCAST, Rutgers).

This service, in addition to my scientific background, led President Bill Clinton to ask me to assume the Chairmanship of the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission in 1995. I had the temerity to step away from a tenured academic position for this role. And it meant commuting to Washington, D.C., during the work week, while leaving behind my 13 year-old son and husband in New Jersey. However, I understood that public service at a high enough level would allow me to have a broad-based influence—and truly to contribute to a better world.

Four years later, I was selected for the Presidency of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute by its Board of Trustees. Over the last 16 years, with the support of Trustees like Arthur Golden, I have overseen the transformation of Rensselaer, the oldest technological research university in the United States, into a world-class institution, with global reach and global impact.

There is no question that the vision to accomplish this has been very much informed by other leadership roles I have taken on.

These include roles in government. In 2009, President Barack Obama appointed me to the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, or PCAST, where I served for over 5 years. Then Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi, when she was the Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives, asked that I serve on the National Commission for the Review of the Research and Development Programs of the United States Intelligence Community. That experience, among others, led President Obama to ask me in 2014 to serve as Co-chair of the President’s Intelligence Advisory Board, which assesses issues pertaining to the quality, quantity, and adequacy of intelligence activities; and the performance of all agencies of the federal government engaged in the collection, evaluation, or production of intelligence, or the execution of intelligence policy. In addition, I serve on the U.S. Secretary of State’s International Security Advisory Board and the U.S. Secretary of Energy Advisory Board.

I also am Vice Chair of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution, a trustee of the Brookings Institution, a member of the board of the Council on Foreign Relations, and a member of the board of the World Economic Forum USA. I am a life member of the MIT Corporation. I am a member of the U.S. National Academy of Engineering, among a number of other professional societies. I am a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, or AAAS, the largest general scientific society in the world. I am a past President of AAAS, and former Chairman of its Board of Directors.

I serve on the boards of leading corporations: IBM, Medtronic, Public Service Enterprise Group (PSEG), and FedEx. I am a former Director of NYSE Euronext and its predecessors, a former Chair of the NYSE Regulation Board, and a former Governor of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.

In addition, I have traveled and do travel quite a bit, nationally and internationally. In fact, as Nuclear Regulatory Chairman, I visited 28 countries, some multiple times, in my four-year tenure.

I often am asked, “How can you do all this, and run a major research university?”

My response is, “How could I not?”

While I always work hard to give value to every organization I serve—and to benefit its shareholders or stakeholders—I also give a great deal of value to Rensselaer in the process. The value to Rensselaer always is a prime consideration, when I am deciding which roles to accept.

It is essential to the successful leadership of a technological research university to understand what is happening in the world. It helps me to anticipate the disruptions for which we need to prepare as an Institute, for which we must prepare the next generation of leaders—disruptions that provide focus and impetus to faculty research.

Through my government service, I am informed about the current state of affairs globally, and in crucial areas such as national security, as well as about public policy, legislation, and regulation.

Through my affiliations with professional scientific and engineering associations, I learn about the progress occurring in research in different disciplines.

My corporate board service keeps me attuned to issues and advances in health care, energy, and many other fields. At IBM, I am steeped in disruptive technologies that are changing how people work, make decisions, and play.

My board service also reminds me that universities should think like corporations now and then. We may have different revenue streams. Every provision of Sarbanes-Oxley may not apply to us—but we face similar challenges in terms of revenue timing and revenue recognition, as well as all the challenges of managing large organizations in terms of human resources. And like businesses, like law firms, we must satisfy a customer base, though in our case, it is students and parents.

My service with the World Economic Forum allows me to learn from global leaders in both business and government.

Beyond information, Rensselaer gains important connections from my associations—and significant exposure for our faculty, who have delivered presentations to a global audience at World Economic Forum meetings.

Ultimately, through my travels and many affiliations, I gain the long view that helps me to guide the Rensselaer research effort and pedagogy.

Taking the long view, two factors define this moment at the largest scale: First, humanity faces increasingly complex global challenges surrounding our food, water, energy supplies; human health and the mitigation of diseases, such as Ebola; a changing climate; and the geopolitics of valuable natural resources. These challenges are intertwined—each has consequences for the others. They cannot possibly be addressed by even the most brilliant person working alone, nor by a single discipline, sector, or nation.

This era, also, is providing us with new opportunities, offered by Big Data, data analytics, and remarkable digital tools and technologies—including the powerful tools of interconnection in your pockets in the form of smart phones. Such challenges and such opportunities demand collaborations across disciplines, sectors, and geographical regions.

So, we train the young leaders on our faculty and staff—and the young leaders we are privileged to educate—for three essential qualities:

Intellectual agility
Multi-cultural sophistication
A global view.
In our students, we encourage intellectual agility by educating them not merely for depth in one field, but also for the breadth to call on the insights of other fields. As one among many examples, with our Art_X@Rensselaer initiative, we help our students to perceive the art in science and the science in art, in classes across the curriculum. We encourage highly interactive learning, urging even undergraduates to participate in research or independent study. And throughout our curriculum and in co-curricular activities, we underscore the value of innovation, discovery, creativity, and entrepreneurship.

Multi-cultural sophistication is clearly crucial in a world that demands that many different kinds of thinking be brought together, in order to address complex problems—and doubly crucial in a nation and a world with changing demographics. We imbue multi-cultural sophistication in our students, in part through the cross-disciplinarity and active nature of their instruction—encouraging them to forge partnerships with people with different perspectives to take on challenging projects. We also encourage such sophistication by creating opportunities for civic engagement, not just within our diverse Rensselaer community, but also in the surrounding communities—and around the globe. We have undergraduate exchange agreements in 11 countries with 23 institutions, which offer our students additional opportunities to connect with people from other cultures. We encourage all of our students to seize the opportunity for study abroad.

Given the powerful ways that technology and trade have linked societies around the world—as well as our common vulnerabilities to challenges such as a changing climate—we expect everyone at Rensselaer to develop a global view. So we focus the efforts of both our faculty and students on the grand global challenges. We are not shy about expressing our expectations. The Rensselaer motto, “Why not change the world?” indicates the scale of the problems and opportunities we want them to tackle.

When it comes to training the young leaders I oversee in a professional capacity, I give them challenging assignments—throw them in the deep end of the pool, so to speak. Then I watch to what extent they are willing and able to come back for guidance—how they self-organize—how resourceful they are. That tells me a lot about them—and their capacity to grow. And we expect—and hire for—multi-cultural sophistication and a global view.

I will finish by offering just a bit of advice to the junior members of this audience. I recommend that you, too, develop intellectual agility, multi-cultural sophistication, and a global view.

I suggest also that you do not expect, and do not slavishly adhere to, a linear path. Instead, be prepared to encounter a pivoting course ahead.

I urge you to have the confidence to veer towards new opportunities in the cases and transactions you work on. Develop the resilience to recover from professional adversity, as well, and do not allow anyone to undermine your faith in yourself.

I encourage you deliberately to stray off the path now and then, if it promises to offer you a valuable new perspective. Take on pro bono cases. Volunteer your services outside the office. Join not-for-profit organizations. Travel abroad. Shape public policy through government service. Assume that you have the capacity to learn and to do a great deal.

My father used to say: “Aim for the stars, so that you can reach the treetops, and, at least, you will get off the ground.” In other words, if you do not aim high, you will not go far.

Try, always, to take the long view—try, always, to change the world for the better—and you will be a leader by definition.

With that, I am happy to take your questions







Good Commencement morning, 2015 graduates!

I offer my most sincere congratulations to each and every one of you. My special congratulations extend, also, to your parents, guardians, families and friends. This is their day, too. And likewise, I congratulate the faculty who taught you and mentored you, guiding you to this day. They all share in today’s celebration of achievement.

Greetings, also, to our esteemed honorands, honored guests, and our trustees.

For our graduates, this day encompasses a multiplicity of emotions—pride and satisfaction, optimism and anticipation, promise and potential, hopes, dreams, plans—and perhaps a little sadness. I urge you to appreciate this moment in all of its fullness and beauty—to cherish it—and remember it always—because you earned it.

As President of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, I offer you a few thoughts as you depart from this place. Each of you is moving into territory not yet investigated: your futures. You will cross uncrossed thresholds. You will seek out the “terra incognita,” as it were, the term often written on ancient maps to indicate an area that was unexplored. You will take with you the knowledge and insights of your Rensselaer education. You will invest that education in all you encounter and apply it with new understanding.

Those of you who were at the President’s Commencement Colloquy yesterday will be familiar with the exceptional biographies of our four honorands who, themselves, have travelled to places no one expected them to reach—bravely entered “terra incognita,” then explored, and changed the world.

Our Commencement Speaker Admiral Michelle J. Howard, last year, was named the 38th Vice Chief of Naval Operations. When she first began envisioning herself in the Navy, women were not yet admitted to the U.S. Naval Academy. The first woman had yet to be commissioned through the Naval Reserve Officer’s Training Corps. Women were many years away from commanding a Navy ship. Admiral Howard’s journey—much like the journey of Roald Amundsen to the South Pole—was one with an uncertain outcome. Like Amundsen, her foresight, resourcefulness, and ability to command, even under challenging conditions, enabled great success. She has benefitted the world by giving us a new model of leadership—and by safeguarding all of us.

The career of Craig Mundie, as well, has been one of constant expansion into the far reaches of the globe. He has moved from engineer and computer entrepreneur, to leader of both strategy and research at Microsoft, to ambassador for information technology to governments around the globe, and advisor to United States Presidents. Today, he is one of the world’s leading thinkers on the ways that information technology is transforming business, our civic life, and the whole of the human experience.

After receiving his Ph.D. in English Literature from Clare College at the University of Cambridge, the scholarship and leadership of Professor Henry Louis Gates, Jr. turned the barely explored subject of African American literature and history into an established discipline of great interest, both to the academy and the public. But that was merely the beginning of a circumnavigatory voyage through all media for this literary theorist, historian, author, journalist, cultural critic, editor, documentary filmmaker, and television producer—a journey that has changed, deepened, diversified, and enriched our American culture.

The career of David M. Rubenstein, also, has ranged in ways enabled by intellectual confidence and personal courage. As a young lawyer, he tried politics, and after working for former Governor Jimmy Carter in the 1976 U.S. Presidential race, soon found himself as Deputy Assistant for Domestic Policy to the United States President. Returning to legal practice after the White House, and finding it unfulfilling, he brooked conventional wisdom, and all expectations, by moving into finance, and founding a buyout firm in Washington, DC—rather than the financial capital of New York City. Many astute people agreed that he, and it, would not succeed. Yet, he turned The Carlyle Group into one of the largest alternative asset management firms in the world, and today, he is a philanthropist of Mount Rushmorian proportions.

With these four exceptional pioneers and explorers on our stage today, I remind our graduates that your Rensselaer degrees place you firmly in a long and distinguished tradition of exploration and pioneering breakthroughs. You are here, as students, for four or five years, but you are Rensselaer graduates, alumni and alumnae forever. And here is what Rensselaer graduates do.

We were established in 1824, at a moment when the natural resources of our continent largely were unknown. Our founder and first senior professor Amos Eaton conducted the first geologic surveys in the Western Hemisphere, and turned Rensselaer into a dominant force in the science of geology.

Those of you who hail from Michigan may know of one such surveyor, Douglass Houghton. His name graces—in Michigan—a city, a county, a lake, a waterfall, schools, numerous public buildings, and an especially rare goldenrod.

He received a Rensselaer degree in geology in 1829. Equipped with that, and medical training, 21-year old Douglass Houghton travelled to Detroit, at the request of a Congressional delegate from the Michigan Territory—who thought that public lectures from a dynamic young scientist and physician would make the gloomy winters in Detroit, a small town of 2,200, less so.

Douglass Houghton spent the next 15 years exploring its Upper and Lower Peninsulas—identifying essential resources—including the pure native copper on the shores of Lake Superior.

In 1837, when Michigan became a state, Houghton was named State Geologist. As he led expeditions, he also vaccinated Native Americans against small pox, while cataloguing the cures they used for various maladies. When not exploring, Houghton ministered to the sick, practiced dentistry, raised funds to open public schools, and was elected Mayor of Detroit. Eventually, he became the first president of the Detroit Board of Education. He also taught geology, mineralogy, and chemistry at the University of Michigan.

Like our honorands, Douglass Houghton moved gracefully from what he already had mastered, into new domains, mastering them in turn and greatly benefitting our nation and our world. He saw overlooked possibilities; he seized opportunities; and he persevered.

Douglass Houghton demonstrated intellectual agility and multi-cultural sophistication to a breath-taking degree.

You—our Rensselaer graduates of today—already have shown yourselves to be explorers, discoverers, and creators in this tradition—young men and women like Emily Franz of your class, who was determined to study engineering in the field of energy after watching a megawatt turbine being installed on the grounds of her high school. A major in Nuclear Engineering, she not only has earned her Senior Reactor Operator License from the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, she has followed her passions towards leadership—mentoring and connecting her fellow students as President of the Rensselaer Chapter of the Society of Women Engineers—and the founder of a Women in Nuclear Chapter.

 Kevin Lyman of the Class of 2015 is firmly in the Douglass Houghton tradition in the modern era. He came to Rensselaer to study game design—and proceeded to change majors eight times—finally receiving a degree in Computer Science. Along the way Kevin founded three start-ups—one of which won the New York State Business Plan Competition—secured a record 9 wins in the Rensselaer Change the World Challenge—and now leaves us to work on his own start-up, Resumazing, an automated web service which helps job seekers leverage data science to find exactly the right positions.

These are but two of many examples among you—of graduates who continually push into the uncharted and untested territory.

As you cross the threshold of new adventures, you will encounter the limitations of established knowledge, the limitations of your own knowledge; the boundaries and constraints others may try to impose—and the necessity of learning continuously. We feel that we have prepared you for this.

And remember, the hopes, the dreams, the expectations, and the best wishes of all of us go with you. Let them sustain you. Seek out the “terra incognita.” What could be more exciting, and important?

Thank you









Good afternoon, Class of 2015. Congratulations to the Achievement Award winners on your accomplishments and the well-deserved recognition.

We have been seeing a lot of each other these past few days and past four years, and it will all culminate Saturday when I have the privilege of awarding you your diplomas. Before I do that, this morning represents an opportunity officially to welcome you as Rensselaer alumni and alumnae, by celebrating your “Zero Year Reunion.”

To begin, I first must acknowledge certain class members for their important contributions to the Class of 2015:

First, Adam Koehr your Class President. Thank you, Adam, for beginning the program today, and for your leadership of your class. Also, thank you to the members of your Class Council, for your dedication, and for your contributions to Rensselaer.

Please allow me to acknowledge the newly elected members of your Alumni Class Council leadership: Erin Amarello, President; Jacob Andrews, Vice President; Colton Fisher, Treasurer; and Sarah Spellane, Secretary.

Thank you for assuming these important roles as your class makes the transition from Rensselaer students to Rensselaer alumni/ae.

Finally, I would like to recognize Lisa DeCrescente, Senior Class Gift Chair.

To all of you who have helped to fund the Class of 2015 gift, you truly are supporting the next generation of Rensselaer students, as they embark upon the award-winning First-Year Experience. I understand that of the 359 students who contributed to this gift, 23 of you have given at a level to qualify you as Student Patroons.

On behalf of the entire Rensselaer community, I thank you for your generosity. Because of you, many incoming freshmen will be afforded an opportunity not otherwise possible for them, and therefore, will know the importance of philanthropy here at Rensselaer.

What a lovely parting gift, and a fitting one at that, since your class is one of the first few to arrive to a fully articulated and developed version of Clustered Learning Advocacy and Support for Students, or CLASS—with the expectation that following the First-Year Experience, you would have a Class Dean, Jennifer Forbes, to guide you until graduation. Thank you, Jennifer, for all you have done to support the Class of 2015.

When you sat before me as eager freshmen on the eve of your first day of classes in August of 2011, I told you that you would not be alone here, that would be surrounded by the Rensselaer community. I hope that your experience has reaffirmed the truth of this.

As you make this important transition from students to Rensselaer alumnae and alumni, my promise still holds.

Just because you no longer will be bound by the Troy campus and CLASS, you still will have the support of the Rensselaer community through the Rensselaer Alumni Association.

Your Rensselaer network will grow with you, and assist you, throughout your lives and your careers. We encourage you to remain in touch with us, as we offer a variety of resources to benefit you.

We will make it easy for you to stay connected to our network, either remotely through social media—or in person, as members of the Rensselaer community travel around the world to keep our geographically diverse alumni and alumnae informed of all that is happening back on campus.

And you and I will have many opportunities to meet again. In my 15 years as President, I have had the great pleasure of traveling the globe to converse with thousands of Rensselaer alumni, alumnae, and friends.

I recently was in New York City to offer our alumni and alumnae an update on our important partnership with the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. I also will travel to the West Coast next week to participate in the annual Silicon Valley Summer Garden Party hosted by Trustee Nancy Mueller. This event strengthens the Rensselaer network by bringing together area alumni and alumnae—with the Class of 2019 and their families—to help welcome these incoming freshmen to the Rensselaer community, and to answer any questions they may have before they embark upon their cross-country journey to Troy.

Please know that we always will be delighted to see you on the Troy campus. We will welcome you at any time, but particularly each October during Reunion & Homecoming Weekend.

As Rensselaer alumni and alumnae, you belong to a very special clan that spans the centuries. You are about to join the ranks of distinguished individuals who have come before you to change the world—as entrepreneurs, scientists, astronauts, architects, corporate leaders, engineers—as explorers, innovators, and discoverers of all kinds.

It now will be your turn to make your mark. You will not be alone in this endeavor.

I close today by thanking each of you, members of the Class of 2015. I thank you for all you have done for Rensselaer during the past four years—and, in advance, for all that you will do in the years to come—as your burnish the Rensselaer legacy by changing the world.

I look forward to seeing you and your families on Saturday








Good evening. Welcome to Albany.

Tonight, we are celebrating the wonderful connections we all have forged over your time at Rensselaer, and the venerable community you soon will join, as Rensselaer alumni and alumnae.

But first, allow me to offer a few acknowledgments. I would like to thank the members of the Class of 2015 Council, as well as the Class Representatives, Class Senators, and Associate Members.

In particular, I thank Class President Adam Koehr, Class Vice President Arjun Chevern, and Class Treasurer Paul Fratto for their leadership. I thank Class Dean Jennifer Forbes and Senior Week Chair Samara Ahmed for their help in arranging this splendid evening.

I thank our graduating Grand Marshal Kyle Keraga—and graduating President of the Union Erin Amarello—in this 150th year of the Grand Marshal tradition, as we celebrate the 125th anniversary of the founding of the Rensselaer Union.

On Saturday, your years at Rensselaer will culminate with a formal Commencement ceremony marking your transition from dedicated, hardworking students—to multidisciplinary, collaborative professionals ready to change the world.

All change is difficult, even good change. But know that as you embark on your next journey, you will join an alumni and alumnae community of more than 100,000—a network of leaders that would compose a city with the size of Albany. The Rensselaer network stretches outwards from our Troy campus—to the Capital Region—to the entire globe.

During your time at Rensselaer, you have benefitted from your exposure to, and participation in, endeavors that address complex challenges with global implications—at our Troy campus, or within easy reach of it.

One excellent example is the Jefferson Project at Lake George, which Rensselaer launched two years ago. We are helping to protect a local treasure, while working to secure the global supply of fresh water.

This approach, of forging connections between people and ideas in all disciplines—at all scales—whether within our backyard, or across the world—to solve great global challenges, is at the heart of our vision for the future of Rensselaer, The New Polytechnic.

The Class of 2015 truly embodies this all-embracing vision. As one among many examples, yours is the first class to emblazon on your class rings the Curtis R. Priem Experimental and Performing Arts Center, or EMPAC.

Building EMPAC, a platform sited boldly on the cutting edge of the performing arts and research into immersive technologies, was a risk. It required investment and courage. At Rensselaer, we are not afraid of going first. We are not afraid of being the best. We believe that investing in your futures is the key to a better world.

By including EMPAC on your class ring, you demonstrate how much you value the contributions that the arts and experimental media made to your studies—and to your perspective on the world.

This year, instead of adding physically to our campus with your Class Gift, you have enlarged us spiritually, with financial support for students, which I consider evidence of wisdom. Your class has funded grants for incoming freshmen, who otherwise could not afford to participate in a whitewater rafting trip in the Adirondacks as part of the Navigating Rensselaer & Beyond experience. On behalf of the incoming students, I thank you for your generosity in introducing them to the Rensselaer community—and the collaborative nature of The New Polytechnic.

Not only is the rafting trip focused on teambuilding—as the freshmen must work together to overcome challenges such as lighting fires, cooking meals, and transporting gear—but it suggests the fun inherent in the great work we do at Rensselaer!

I hope you, too, are having fun this week. I encourage you to revel in your sense of accomplishment.

Some of you already are considering job offers from industry leaders such as Google, Procter & Gamble, and Boeing. Others of you will be furthering your educations in graduate programs at distinguished universities that include Rensselaer, Johns Hopkins, Carnegie Mellon and my alma mater, MIT—in fields as varied as robotics, forensics, and medicine.

Know that we are very proud of you and all that you have accomplished at Rensselaer. We will be watching as you scale great heights, and cheering you along every step of the way.

Tonight, however, I hope you now will allow the sense of purpose that has guided you thus far, to fuel the enjoyment! Indeed, I hope you will join me on the dance floor after dinner for a grand Rensselaer tradition—the “Electric Slide.”

Congratulations on all of your achievements. Please enjoy the rest of Senior Week, and this lovely evening









Good evening. It is a pleasure to be here to share in this celebration of athletics at Rensselaer.

As you know, Dr. Lee A. McElroy, Jr., took the helm of our athletics program in March. He has demonstrated exceptional leadership in athletic administration and higher education for more than three decades.

At the University at Albany, where he served as Vice President and Director of Athletics, Dr. McElroy was thrice awarded the Stuart P. Haskell, Jr. Commissioner’s Cup, which recognizes the strongest athletic program in the America East Conference. His teams earned 32 NCAA post-season berths, and brought home 63 America East Conference titles. We are fortunate to have him, and are grateful for the ways in which he is helping Rensselaer student-athletes to develop into remarkable women and men.

At Rensselaer, we strive to equip all of our students with the intellectual agility and multicultural sophistication necessary to become global leaders, in a future laden with complex and interconnected challenges. Our expectations for our student-athletes are very high: We expect them to change the world.

As you know, the attributes and skills needed are not developed only in classrooms—but also in laboratories, in the residential setting, at the Student Union, in community service, in international experience, and on the playing field.

Often, it is said that in the heat of competition, leaders are made. As athletes, you have learned endurance and determination; how to take risks as individuals, and how to combine your skills, successfully, with the skills of others. You have learned how to triumph graciously, and how to hold your heads high in defeat. Frankly, by succeeding while remaining grounded, by losing and coming back to play again, you have learned how to live.

Perseverance, focus, collegiality—these are the qualities of successful scientists, engineers, architects, business leaders, scholars, and artists, as well—of leaders who have cultivated deep knowledge in their chosen disciplines, yet draw on the perspectives of multiple disciplines—to focus our collective intelligence on improving lives. These are the qualities that guide Rensselaer, as we transform ourselves into The New Polytechnic—a crossroads for collaborations across disciplines, sectors, and regions, in order to answer great global challenges.

Through your sport, you have not merely developed yourselves as individuals and teams—you have added life and meaning to The New Polytechnic as a whole. We spectators have followed your progress over the last four years with excitement and cheers—conscious of the ways you have brought us together and helped to make Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute a community—with your success reflecting our success.

During your time here, Rensselaer has won 14 Liberty League regular season or tournament championships, led by the Men’s Track and Field team, which topped the Liberty League each of the last seven years. This evening, the Baseball team played in the New York Regional of the NCAA Tournament, after winning twice on Saturday to capture the league championship.

Rensselaer teams have played in six NCAA Tournaments, led by Women’s Lacrosse, which has accomplished this feat for three years in a row. We also sent several individuals to NCAA Championships, including Jacob Andrews of the Class of 2015, who competed in the Men’s Cross Country NCAA event in Ohio this year.

Our impressive group of seniors includes Matt Koziol, who was the Liberty League Men’s Soccer Player of the Year and Rob Dewald, who was Defensive Player of the Year—as well as Andrew Franks, the record-setting kicker who, earlier this month, signed a National Football League contract with the Miami Dolphins.

In addition to excelling in your respective athletic endeavors, you have sparkled academically.

As one among many examples, Amanda Lynch of the Women’s Basketball Team, a Biomedical Engineering major with a 3.88 cumulative grade point average, was named a Capital One Academic All-America in February. This national award recognizes combined athletic and academic achievement.

Our student-athletes of the Class of 2015 also distinguished themselves with their passionate concern for others. Let me mention Chloe Hutchinson of the Field Hockey team. In addition to starting every game in her athletic career here, and interning this summer at Boeing—Chloe also served as president of the Student Athlete Advisory Committee (SAAC), where she helped to plan and implement a Special Olympics basketball tournament and a canned goods drive for the Salvation Army. She is an example of what we mean by communiversity.

I commend all those receiving awards tonight, and those being inducted into Olympia, the Rensselaer student-athlete honor society. You have distinguished yourselves as ambassadors for Rensselaer, on and off the playing field.
Soon the student-athletes of the Class of 2015 will leave the cherry and white colors of the Rensselaer jersey behind. But know that we always will view each of you as an “Engineer”: one who combines grace and speed, with inventiveness—and generosity to a team, and to a cause.

Wherever your paths through life take you, we know that you will take the lead, you will make a difference, and you will make the world a better place.

Thank you












Good evening.

I am delighted to welcome our next senior class—the Class of 2016—to the annual Junior Ring Ceremony. This event, which first was held at Rensselaer in the spring of 2004, marks a special moment in your college career.

Not long ago, when you made the decision to attend Rensselaer, you became part of our family and part of our rich legacy. When you sat in front of me—wide-eyed, excited, and perhaps a little anxious—on the eve of your first day of classes as freshmen back in August of 2012, I encouraged you to get to know your fellow classmates. Given all of your brilliance and diversity, I was quite certain that you would expand each other’s sense of the world.

This is what makes the university setting so crucial to progress of all kinds. We serve as a great physical crossroads where scientists, engineers, artists, scholars, and students in diverse disciplines meet, talk, and spark the innovations and discoveries that improve the lives around the world.

Interaction and interactivity lie at the heart of our vision for the third century of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute—a vision we have termed “The New Polytechnic”—in which talented people work together across disciplines, sectors, and global regions—using the most advanced tools and technologies—to address complex and interconnected challenges.

We are educating you within this paradigm to provide you with the best opportunities for success throughout your life. It is important that you take full advantage of your remaining time at Rensselaer.

Over the next 12 months, you will be presented with many opportunities to pause and reflect upon your Rensselaer years, by various celebrations and events. During this time, I urge you, yet again, to seek out your peers, especially the people in majors far removed from your own, just for a conversation. One never knows where the next great scientific discovery, engineering innovation, business idea, building design, or art project will come from!
When you become Rensselaer alumni and alumnae in just a little over a year’s time, you will recognize that you share many qualities and experiences with all of the men and women who have studied here over almost two centuries.

Your class ring is an important reminder of this legacy and bond. The class ring tradition in the United States began in 1835 at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, and became more widespread in the 20th century. Since the 1960s, Rensselaer students have designed rings to reflect the shared experiences that are special to each class. Rensselaer is one of only a few schools in the country where the class rings are redesigned by the students each year.

Allow me to highlight the features that distinguish the rings that belong to the Rensselaer Class of 2016. The symbols you chose demonstrate your connection to Rensselaer, the surrounding community, and the greater world.

First, the Rensselaer foot bridge appears at the top, representing the thousands of steps that carried you between your residential life and your academic pursuits.

It is fitting to find our great challenge to you—“Why not change the world?”—perched just below the foot bridge and atop a globe. We know that you will make your marks on the world—and that you will make them with great kindness and goodwill, as represented by the olive branches surrounding the globe.

Olive branches, many of which are incorporated into the architecture throughout the historic city of Troy, also highlight your connection to Troy itself, as does The Approach.

Finally, the Student Union is displayed prominently to recognize its importance to your class as the hub of all student activity, and to commemorate its 125th anniversary.

Many members of your Class Council worked hard to design rings that capture the unique spirit of the Class of 2016, and I congratulate them on their reflection, ambition, and wit!

In the end, your rings are a symbolic link to your classmates, friends, and generations of alumni and alumnae. I hope you wear your rings proudly in your remaining time here, and beyond—for you never know what type of conversation a Rensselaer class ring may help to spark.

Now, please put on your rings, and I ask you to raise your glasses as I offer a toast:

I congratulate you, the Rensselaer Class of 2016, as you receive your class rings. Your devotion to Rensselaer—and to one another—will live on in this powerful symbol. I hope it reminds you never to stop asking yourselves, “Why not change the world?”

Cheers











It is a great privilege to be invited to speak at this 2015 Fisk University Commencement—and to share this platform with my fellow honorands—who all are inspiring advocates for higher education—Billye Aaron, the great Hank Aaron (with whom I received an honorary degree from Dartmouth in 2000), and Governor Haslam.

But the real reason that I am delighted to be here is you—the Fisk University Class of 2015. To the graduates here today, to their families and guardians, I say, “Well done!”

At the university I lead, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, the oldest technological research university in the United States, we have a rather piquant motto: “Why not change the world?” We challenge our students with this, because so many of our graduates have changed the world, in fields that range from civil engineering, to genomics, to optics and the invention of the first digital camera.

In fact, if Steve Sasson of the Rensselaer Class of 1972 had not decided, early in his career, that a digital camera would be an interesting application for a new charge coupled device, your family members and friends who are not here today would not be receiving the selfies I know you are texting, but would probably spend the next several weeks waiting by their mailboxes…for you to process your film, and then mail them the printed photos of this ceremony that would give them a belated…and possibly deflated…sense of joy.

Our traditions at Rensselaer are based on leadership in science and technology, and we are proud of them; but you have such a remarkable legacy at Fisk that I challenge you: “Why not change the world?”

The leaders who have come out of Fisk have done exactly that, from W.E. B. Du Bois, to the great Diane Nash and U.S. Congressman John Lewis, the leaders of the most inspiring, courageous, and effective chapter of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee during the Civil Rights era—the Nashville Chapter. As Diane Nash and John Lewis did, many of your forebears at Fisk fought for justice and equality for all, making this a fairer, wiser nation—indeed, a fairer, wiser world. Many of them were so exceptional in their own right, that their very excellence rendered arguments for discrimination against African Americans absurd.

In 1960, Diane Nash was a college student—21 years old—and terrified to find herself leading sit-ins at segregated Nashville lunch counters. Yet, on the steps of City Hall, at the end of a protest march, she calmly asked the Mayor of Nashville the question at the heart of it all: “Do you feel that it is wrong to discriminate against a person solely on the basis of his race or color?”

Confronted by such an intelligent, composed, strong presence, the Mayor found himself unable to say that it was “morally right.” With that single moment of clarity, Nashville became the first Southern city to integrate its lunch counters.

We are at another watershed moment today. Great challenges face us—in our global supplies of food, water, and energy; in human health and the mitigation of disease; in national and global security; in the allocation and geopolitics of valuable natural resources; and in lingering inequalities in income and opportunity—here and around the world—as well as inequalities we sometimes witness in the ways laws are enforced, or inequalities in the laws themselves.

I grew up in Washington, DC, and benefitted greatly from the 1954 Brown v. the Board of Education Supreme Court decision, which held that separate but equal is not equal—and, when handed down, meant that I could attend an excellent public school around the corner from where we lived—which, for years, my siblings and I had to bypass to attend the “segregated” school further away. This new academic journey put me on an accelerated academic track through high school.

As I was finishing high school, with the support of my college counselor, and the encouragement of the Assistant Principal for the boys —interestingly, not the one for the girls—I applied to, was admitted to, and earned a scholarship to attend MIT.

In many ways, MIT was a thrilling place to receive an education. It also was cold and unwelcoming on the personal front, and, often, the academic front. I was one of just two African-American women in my class. Some of my fellow students believed that even common courtesy did not apply to me. People refused to eat meals with me. I was not invited to join the study groups in my dormitory or in classes. Fellow students would not sit next to me in class.

When I was still deciding on a major, a professor offered me this career advice: "Colored girls should learn a trade." Although I was an honors student, the expectation was that I was only fit for a trade or clerical position, not a creative one.

I was shocked and hurt, but that made me think about chances and choices. Chance had made me colored. Chance had made me a girl. I happily embraced both. That heritage gave me strength. As for the choice of a trade—I chose physics. When I was faced with two possibilities—either to assent to ignorance, or to go on to excellence—I chose the latter. I chose to persevere. I, frankly, was inspired in such a choice by the sacrifices, and the bravery of young African American college students like Diane Nash and John Lewis.

I did extremely well in that professor’s class—so well that he offered me a job in his laboratory. I think that I taught him something, too: That physics is a perfectly appropriate trade for a young African-American woman.

The lesson for you—today’s graduates—is that heritage is by chance, success is by choice. Your race, your skin color, your sex, the place you come from, your roots—these are not the things you get to choose. To a large extent they define who you are—but they do not define what you will become.

Your birth heritage is represented today by the proud faces of your parents or guardians. You must respect, appreciate, and embrace that heritage—how it shapes you, and, also, the challenges that may ensue because of it. This will give you strength, and ideally, compassion for others.

I also want you to think about heritage in a different way—and that is, to use it, and the strength you draw from it, to take full charge of your choices. Never allow anyone to put a ceiling on your dreams, or to tell you what you cannot accomplish. Choose to be excellent. This will not be easy, but you already have done that here—to get to this point—this graduation day.

When I was a senior at MIT, deciding where to attend graduate school, and ready for a warmer climate, metaphorically speaking, the University of Pennsylvania invited me to visit. One of the physicists whose work most interested me was there.

After my visit, as I was leaving Penn, in April, 1968, in a car with my sorority sister—a Delta—on my way to the Philadelphia airport, the radio broadcast was interrupted, and we learned that the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. had been shot. We nearly drove the car off the road.

The day before, Dr. King had given a magnificent speech in which he imagined the Almighty allowing him a choice of any era in which to live. Despite the violence of the times, despite the constant threats against his life, Dr. King said that he would give the Almighty this response: “If you allow me to live just a few years in the second half of the 20th century, I will be happy.”

By the time I got back to MIT, I knew that if the Almighty posed a similar choice to me, the right response was, “Let me spend a few more years at MIT in the second half of the 20th century.” Why? It had not been an easy place to live and learn.

I chose MIT over any other graduate school for one important reason: It was the place where I would have the greatest possible opportunity to change things for the better.

MIT needed more minority students, for its own sake—indeed, for the sake of the nation—and it needed to offer those young people a more welcoming experience. So, with a group of like-minded students, I formed the Black Students’ Union, and we presented ten proposals to the MIT administration. Provost Paul Gray, who later became President of MIT, listened, formed a Task Force on Educational Opportunity, and asked me to join it.

The Task Force accomplished a great deal, and MIT began to recruit minority students; to hire black administrators and faculty; and to offer a summer program for incoming freshmen—to ease minority students into the culture and rigorous classwork of MIT.

The African-American students I had helped to bring to MIT excelled. They proved to the world that scientific and engineering talent is not restricted to one race, or one sex, or one story of origin.

When I had entered college, uncertain and friendless, I never thought that I soon would be reshaping that institution for the better. In fact, as an undergraduate, I was reticent and quiet. But I was so affected by my own experience at MIT; by Dr. King’s life and death; and by the courage and tenacity of college students, such as the Fisk students of that era, that when I saw a challenge that needed to be addressed—one that I could address—I chose to do it. It made me a leader. I was not seeking leadership per se, but because of that experience, and because I chose the “trade” of physics, I have had the remarkable life and career that I am still privileged to have today.

Diane Nash did really big things. She has spoken about a similar movement into leadership by finding herself, at a young age, confronting entrenched powers—while calmly deflecting a representative of United States Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, when he urged her not to send Nashville students out to be Freedom Riders, to integrate interstate bus travel, given the likelihood of violence. She has said that she often was very afraid. Yet, others saw her as fearless—as well as a brilliant strategist.

Diane Nash has said: “The Movement had a way of reaching inside you and bringing out things you did not even know were there.”

All great causes have that power. When you are inspired to make the world a better place—even if you yourself feel small, young, powerless, and scared—you will rise to the occasion. So, do not shy away from a great challenge. Realistically, you will face many challenges—personal and global. Life is not a cakewalk. But, have the faith, focus on excellence, tenacity, and grace to do great things. These attributes will shape you, burnish you, and make you great as well.

Aim high, and you will become your own best qualities.

My father used to say: “Aim for the stars, so that you can reach the treetops, and, at least, you will get off the ground.” In other words, if you do not aim high, you will not go far. The key point is not that challenges will not come to you, but that you will come through any travails you have, based on how you govern yourselves. And, when you have to stand in the wind, which you will, remember the words of the great religious anthem,
“Amazing Grace”:

Through many dangers, toils, and snares
I have already come;
'Tis grace hath brought me safe thus far,
and grace will lead me home.

Diane Nash believed it. John Lewis believed it. Now, you believe it.

Congratulations and Godspeed












Good morning.

Thank you for joining us for the Presidential Joint Service Awards Ceremony. I especially welcome the midshipmen, cadets, and guests of the New York Capital Region Army, Naval, and Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps programs. To the cadets and midshipmen from our neighboring colleges and universities—we are honored to have you and your guests with us.

At Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, we challenge ourselves with the question, “Why not change the world?”

To change it, however, we must recognize that we find ourselves at a watershed moment. The world faces complex and interconnected global challenges. These include new geopolitical tensions and the rise of radical non-state actors; a changing climate; pandemics and other health-related issues; the need for a sustainable infrastructure; and the competition among nations for valuable natural resources—as, for example, melting Arctic Sea ice opens up previously inaccessible reserves of petroleum, natural gas, and minerals.

At the same time, new tools, particularly in the digital realm, offer us new opportunities to connect with each other, and with new sources of information.

What is required to make the highest possible use of these opportunities, and to solve the largest and hardest problems, is something we have termed “The New Polytechnic”: a fresh collaborative endeavor across disciplines, sectors, and global regions, that is animated by advanced technologies, and that focuses on addressing great global challenges.

The leaders initiating and supporting these collaborations in future will be men and women who celebrate discovery, and the ethical application of new technologies. They will have cultivated deep knowledge in their chosen discipline, yet draw on the perspectives of multiple disciplines—to focus our collective intelligence on securing our nation, strengthening global security, and improving lives.

I can think of no better examples of such dynamic leadership than the men and women who have prepared for service within the ROTC. I am certain that all of you, through your spheres of educational influence, and in your individual ROTC units, have experienced the interdependence and comradery born of teamwork. The skills you have learned—working together toward common goals, and placing others above self—are paramount to military service—and to making the world a better place.

The ROTC program at Rensselaer has a long and distinguished history, beginning in 1941, when, three months before the bombing of Pearl Harbor, the Naval unit was commissioned. In 1947, the Army unit began, with an affiliation with the Corps of Engineers, Transportation Corps, and Signal Corps. Two years later, the Air Force detachment was added. It now serves as the “host” unit for cadets at 22 regional colleges and universities—drawing primarily from Siena College, University at Albany, Williams College, Hudson Valley Community College, and, of course, Rensselaer.

At Rensselaer, our proud association with the military long has helped to defend this country in times of war: The people of Rensselaer have contributed many “firsts,” from the construction of the U.S.S. Monitor—an ironclad Civil War steamship with a revolving turret that revolutionized the design of naval vessels—to the design of the B-58 Bomber, the world’s first long-range supersonic aircraft.

Yesterday evening, at the Armory, a plaque was dedicated to U.S. Marine Corps 2nd Lieutenant Ian Thomas McVey, Class of 2007, who was struck and killed, tragically, in a motorcycle accident while serving stateside in 2008. Like so many of our alumni and alumnae, he was a true trailblazer. Lieutenant McVey became the first platoon commander for the Assault Breacher Vehicle, a specially engineered Abrams tank used to clear a path through Improvised Explosive Devices—the first of its kind in the Marine Corps. After his death, two pioneering Assault Breacher Vehicles were dedicated to him. Today, we welcome his parents, who will present an award in honor of their son, to a top-performing Marine-option graduate.

Like Lieutenant McVey, many Rensselaer people have served our country with distinction, and we are proud of their accomplishments. Collectively, they have commanded naval fleets, directed NASA programs, become astronauts whose courage and delight in adventure have inspired children all over the globe, and revolutionized the field of vertical flight. Following their military careers, many have gone on to great civic achievements—such as Washington A. Roebling of the Class of 1857, who, following his distinguished service in the Civil War, became the chief engineer of the Brooklyn Bridge. After he was afflicted with decompression sickness—an occupational hazard of bridge-building—his wife, Emily Roebling, stepped into a more active role, carrying out all communication with the bridge contractors, with a keen understanding of the engineering involved. She was among the first women leaders in the management of technology.

At Rensselaer, we hold the leadership abilities of women in very high regard. And we greatly anticipate the insights that our Commencement Speaker, Admiral Michelle Howard, the 38th Vice Chief of Naval Operations, will offer us this year. As you know, the occupations open to women in the military have expanded greatly in recent years—and those that remain closed currently are under review, with the presumption that all positions soon will be open to women, except in those occupational specialties for which the United States Department of Defense approves an exemption.

At Rensselaer, we have been preparing women for military achievement for 40 years—and we have witnessed many examples of extraordinary valor among our women cadets and midshipmen. U.S. Air Force Captain Carmen Lucci of the Class of 1975 is a shining example. She was the first female ROTC cadet at Rensselaer—and she chose to take on the risks of becoming a flight test engineer. She lost her life, when her A-26 Invader aircraft crashed near Three Sisters Dry Lake, northeast of Edwards Air Force Base in 1981.

We fervently hope that our servicemen and servicewomen always remain safe. However, sacrifice in some form is undeniably a part of military service. Both my husband (in Vietnam) and my father (in World War II) served in military combat, so I am well aware of the courage and sacrifice required to place duty first.

This past year, the Rensselaer community lost one of its most admirable alumni, U.S. Army Major General Harold Joseph Greene of the Class of 1980. He was killed in Kabul, when a man opened fire on a coalition of leaders while they were touring an Afghan army military academy.

Within the Army, Major General Greene was much admired for his unusually collaborative leadership style. He commanded by listening to, and empathizing with, the men and women he led. A true Rensselaer alumnus, he was a great advocate for technology in the military.

Earlier, I spoke about collaboration as a necessary quality of leadership, and the driving force behind The New Polytechnic. One of the most interesting collaborations we lead at Rensselaer is the Social Cognitive Networks Academic Research Center, or SCNARC. This is joint effort of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, IBM, Rensselaer, and a number of other universities.

The Center seeks to understand—using the treasure-trove of data on social networks such as Twitter, Facebook, and Tumblr—how ideas and movements form, spread, influence, and create societies. Major General Greene was a great champion of this effort, and was a guest speaker at the opening of the research center.

One particularly interesting SCNARC research project is automating the recognition of hidden networks that use coded language, in societies in which it is dangerous to express oneself openly. The results could offer a new awareness of context and cultural nuances within the arena of conflict-resolution, as well as potentially exposing dangerous hidden networks.

Given the diverse cultures you will encounter in your military careers—and the proliferation of virtual interactions in the military—at Rensselaer, we have worked hard to develop in you multi-cultural sophistication, and intellectual agility. In future, your ability to listen; to be clear and persuasive when you speak; and to inspire trust and to motivate others—even across great distances—will be crucial to your success.

All of you have shown dedication, discipline, and determination—simultaneously accepting the responsibilities required for your preparation as officers, and the commitments your education demands.

In addition to these requirements, ROTC students are engaged in all aspects of the community. Among those here today are students who have participated in the Rensselaer Relay for Life; the annual Run to Remember, which raises money for the Wounded Warrior Project; and Habitat for Humanity.

In your military careers, you will go on to have experiences that make you kinder, braver, and wiser people—experiences that will enrich every aspect of your lives and personal histories.

You are learning not only to be effective team members and leaders—you also are learning to lead lives of fulfillment, empathy, and service to humanity—through self-discipline, flexibility, and respect for others. Lieutenant McVey often said something quite profound about the dangers he faced: “A soldier has to have a happy heart.” Indeed, this is what your training has prepared you for: for the transcendent happiness of those who are willing—no matter what the personal cost—to dedicate themselves to a great cause, and to the well-being of others. For that, you have the admiration and the gratitude of the entire nation that you serve.

I am proud of the cadets and midshipmen at Rensselaer. Wherever you go and whatever you do, remember that you are part of the Rensselaer community. Our thoughts and prayers, always, are with you. I know that each of the colleges and universities represented here is equally proud of its ROTC graduates.

We congratulate you today. We place our faith and our future in your futures.

Thank you









Good afternoon. I am delighted to have this opportunity to provide you with an update on our progress at Rensselaer.

Rensselaer alumni and alumnae are a remarkable group, so I greatly enjoy meeting with and speaking to them across the nation—including the Boston Alumni Chapter last fall, and the New York City Alumni Chapter just last month at The Harmonie Club.

To begin, I would like to congratulate Teri Kozikowski on her selection as the next President of the Rensselaer Alumni Association. I look forward to working with Teri, and all of you, as we move Rensselaer forward.

I would like to thank you for your participation in the second Pi Day Giving Challenge, hosted by the Division of Institute Advancement. Together, we made history, raising a grand total of $260,614 for Rensselaer from 1,206 donors, comprising trustees, alumni, alumnae, faculty, staff, parents, students, and friends—the largest number of donors who ever have contributed to Rensselaer in a single day. Thank you for your support: both your gifts, and your tweets, retweets, and posts about this engaging event. Its success has drawn the attention of other universities, and helps to elevate the stature of the Institute.

I also commend you, and express my gratitude—because, as a Board, you have had 100 percent participation in Annual Giving to Rensselaer for the past six years. I appreciate your support, and our students appreciate your support.

Your efforts are recognized, not just by those of us inside Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute—but also by the outside world, in its appreciation for the excellence of the education we offer. Just this week, the Brookings Institution released a report designed to rank American colleges in a more rational way, looking at over 7,000 institutions of higher learning and considering economic value-added. Of four-year colleges, we rank in the 99th percentile in terms of the value we add to the occupational earnings power of the typical graduate. We rank in the 99th percentile in terms of the value of alumni skills. And we rank in the 99th percentile, as well, in terms of the average aid per student provided by the institution—and that is a direct measure of your devotion.

I recently have had opportunities to highlight the dynamic work taking place at Rensselaer to the larger world. This past January, I represented Rensselaer at the 2015 World Economic Forum Annual Meeting in Davos, Switzerland, which drew 1,500 of the most influential business people in the world, and more than 300 heads of state and government leaders. We are fortunate to have some influence on the conversations occurring there, through my service on the World Economic Forum Science Advisory Committee, and the board of the World Economic Forum USA.

I recently had the privilege of delivering the inaugural Pauline Newman ›47 Lecture in Science, Technology, and Society at Vassar College. For those of you who are not familiar with Judge Newman, she was one of the first women research chemists in American industry, as well as the first woman to be appointed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. Using the insights and knowledge that she garnered as a scientist, she has had tremendous influence in intellectual property law. This is not an unfamiliar career path at Rensselaer, where a number of alumni and alumnae have used the scientific and technological education they received here to make their mark in intellectual property law, including the Chairman of our Board of Trustees, Judge Arthur J. Gajarsa ‘62, who served with Judge Newman on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.

As Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute prepares to celebrate the 200th anniversary of its founding in 2024, it is critical that, as these distinguished judges did, we draw on the perspectives of multiple disciplines in order to make progress for our nation and the world.

Today, just as we are positioning Rensselaer for its third century of service, the world is at a watershed moment—shaped by three factors.

First, is the fact that the challenges humanity faces are increasingly complex, interconnected, and global. These include issues surrounding our food, water, and energy supplies; human health and the mitigation of disease; a changing climate; and the allocation and geopolitics of valuable natural resources.

The second factor defining this moment is the consequent need to create graduates who are global citizens and lifelong learners.

The third factor is the rise of Big Data, as well as the increasing availability of technologies that connect people and divergent sources of information in new ways—enabling new angles on old problems, and collaborative endeavors never before possible.

Both our challenges, and our opportunities, are so great that they cannot be addressed by the most talented person working alone, nor even by a single discipline, sector, or nation.

What is required is a new paradigm for teaching, learning, and research, which we have termed “The New Polytechnic.” Using advanced technologies, The New Polytechnic enables collaborations between talented people across disciplines, sectors, and global regions, in order to address the complex problems the world faces.

This vision of The New Polytechnic already is making a difference in the global impact of our research, in our innovative pedagogy, and in the lives of our students.

Launched two years ago, The Rensselaer Institute for Data Exploration and Applications—or, The Rensselaer IDEA, is a prime example of The New Polytechnic in action. It is supporting research in every discipline at Rensselaer, by bringing together our strengths in web science, data science, cognitive computing, high-performance computing, and immersive technologies—with applications in engineering and the physical, life, and social sciences.

The Rensselaer IDEA is promoting different ways of thinking not only among the world-class faculty and students assembled here, and is enabled by the amazing systems and machines that compose our remarkable computational ecosystem. These include...

AMOS, the most powerful supercomputer at an American private university;
Watson, the cognitive computing system whose ability to process natural language information, and to draw inferences from it, allows it to find correlations within massive amounts of unstructured data, and to generate new hypotheses based on it.
And the Curtis R. Priem Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center, or EMPAC, our state-of-the-art platform for data visualization and exploration, and research into immersive technologies—as well as a remarkable venue for the performing arts.
The Rensselaer IDEA also is yielding significant, data-driven partnerships, such our affiliation with the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai; a partnership with IBM and The Fund for Lake George in The Jefferson Project at Lake George—which is using that beautiful Adirondack lake to create a new model of data-driven environmental stewardship. The Jefferson Project currently is listed in the InformationWeek Elite 100—in fact, it is showcased there as one of “20 Great Ideas to Steal.”

We have a new partnership with IBM to create the Cognitive and Immersive Systems Laboratory@EMPAC, or CISL. The initial focus of CISL will be on the creation of Situations Rooms—immersive environments that assist their occupants by listening to, watching, and interacting with them. A Situations Room will help collaborators working at the same time on different aspects of a larger project to make better decisions. Ultimately, this tool could have many applications, such as a cognitive design studio, a cognitive boardroom, a cognitive medical diagnostics room, or a cognitive classroom. If we consider how much smart phones have changed our lives, it is easy to foresee that “smart rooms” will prove revolutionary.

In addition to the many ways The Rensselaer IDEA is animating The New Polytechnic, a new program within the Office of Research also is bringing together different disciplines to address the hard problems. This Knowledge and Innovation Program—or KIP—offers seed grants to researchers across the Institute, with the requirement that faculty from either HASS or Lally be among the collaborators.

One of the first KIP projects, arising out of The Jefferson Project, is a joint endeavor of Professors Rick Relyea and Sandra Nierzwicki-Bauer of the Darrin Fresh Water Institute and our Department of Biological Sciences; Professor Chuck Stewart, head of the Department of Computer Science; and Professors Kathleen Ruiz and Kathy High of our Department of the Arts. Together, they are developing new technology to capture, analyze, and model in three dimensions the distribution of plankton in Lake George. Plankton are the foundation of the food web, and can include invasive species, so they have a great deal to say about the health of a body of water. Professor Ruiz and Professor High will present the results of this research—and the discreet charm of these small, drifting creatures—to a large audience by creating an immersive 3-D virtual environment artwork from it, using a team of student artists, sound designers, game developers, and programmers.

As this example suggests, The New Polytechnic encourages us to be transformative in our pedagogy.

We now offer a summer Virtual Calculus Bridge program for incoming freshmen who need extra preparation in mathematics. This program, which first was introduced during the summer of 2014, offers a residential component with an online calculus course, as well as follow-up support programming during the academic year—and the students who have been through it are doing very well.

Since all of our students, in every major, will be required to use data to make decisions in their professional lives, we are incorporating data literacy and data analytics into every aspect of the Rensselaer curriculum, beginning with freshman mathematics courses. We call it DATUM: Data Analytics Through Undergraduate Mathematics.

Our students are benefitting, as well, from a new initiative— Art_X@Rensselaer. The idea is to explore the art in science and engineering, and the science and engineering in art, in order for them to recognize patterns that cross the disciplines. With Art_X@Rensselaer, we will promote creative cross-over and cross-disciplinary thinking throughout the curriculum.

We continue to move forward with innovative means of teaching and learning arising out of Rensselaer research—including multi-player, mixed reality classes and cyber-enabled learning and discovery. Examples of this include Geo Explorer, a mixed-reality and mobile game being developed with funding from the National Science Foundation that teaches the design, testing, and inspection of flood protection systems. Geo Explorer allows students to experience, virtually, the practical consequences of engineering decisions during extreme conditions, such as Hurricane Katrina—and to become better engineers for it.

A multi-player mixed-reality game we call The Mandarin Project helps Rensselaer students to learn the Chinese language through gamification, conversation, and cultural immersion in virtual environments that include the Beijing airport and a Chinese tea house. With an engaging narrative that spans an academic semester, The Mandarin Project accelerates student learning. This project will become one of our first examples of a cognitive classroom, because very soon, we will have students interacting and conversing, within virtual scenes, with artificially intelligent digital characters. And when our students go abroad, they will have developed, through direct and virtual experiences, cultural nuance that they otherwise would not have.

Ultimately, we aim to be holistically transformative in our students’ lives. CLASS, or Clustered Learning, Advocacy, and Support for Students, is foundational to this effort.

We begin with the CLASS model before our incoming students even step onto the Troy campus formally. That is where you come in. First, you create a sense of community by your welcome of incoming students. I understand that this year, you will host 21 send-offs across the country for The Class of 2019, and their parents. In fact, I will be speaking at the annual Garden Party at the home of Nancy Mueller in June, which, as you know, is the Northern California send-off.

These community-building initiatives are followed by Student Orientations and the Navigating Rensselaer & Beyond Program—a week of exploration, fun, and adventure designed to familiarize our newest students with the Troy campus, with the history, geography, and beauty of the entire region, and with each other. Together, these events send a message to these future alumni and alumnae of how much we value them, and they reinforce the wisdom of their decision to choose Rensselaer.

As our students progress throughout their years at Rensselaer, we offer them a network of support through both residential and time-based clustering and programming. CLASS also creates opportunities for development of many different kinds: academic, personal, professional, and cultural. We develop civic-mindedness and leadership skills. We want our students to grow in confidence and empathy, and to see themselves as citizens of larger communities from Troy, New York to the entire globe. In fact, we encourage all of our students to seize every opportunity for the life-changing experience of study, research, an internship, or volunteer work abroad.

Through CLASS, we develop students with the intellectual agility and multicultural sophistication to become leaders in a future laden with complex challenges.

We are beginning a move to restructure the academic calendar through the implementation of Sophomore Summer, followed by a semester away from campus in the junior year.

For the past two centuries, Rensselaer students and graduates have dealt with boundaries by pushing them outwards. They truly have changed the world. We are transforming into The New Polytechnic so that they can continue this tradition in our third century of service.

To realize this vision, we will continue to seek the support and counsel of the entire Rensselaer community—particularly from those of you in the room today, who serve as the voice of our distinguished alumni and alumnae.

Thank you for all that you do for Rensselaer













Welcome to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute!

We are delighted to meet the remarkable young men and women who stood out from an extremely competitive application process, to arrive at this day.

We also are delighted to meet the parents and guardians who helped to make you outstanding. Congratulations to all of you.

We have a wonderful motto at Rensselaer: “Why not change the world?” We feel confident in issuing such a challenge because, since 1824, Rensselaer students have changed the world, and contributed to many of the most important discoveries and innovations of their day. Rensselaer alumni and alumnae…

engineered the Brooklyn Bridge and the Ferris Wheel,
founded Texas Instruments,
invented the digital camera,
sequenced the first complete genome of a free-living organism,
directed the Apollo Spacecraft Program that landed humans on the moon,
and, more recently, became social media stars as astronauts on the International Space Station,
bioengineered the first safe, synthetic heparin—the most widely used fast-acting anticoagulant drug in the world,
and founded a company called Ecovative that uses mushroom filaments and agricultural waste to manufacture a sustainable alternative to plastic foams.
We are very proud of our current students, as well, including the undergraduate team of math majors, who this year ranked third in North America, in the extremely challenging William Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition.

And we expect great things of you.

Please allow me to summarize what it is that makes a Rensselaer education truly special—and why it is that, throughout our history, we have helped to develop so many explorers, innovators, discoverers, entrepreneurs, and leaders in all fields.

From our founding in 1824, we have offered something distinctive. At a moment when students were expected to sit passively in their chairs and to listen to lectures, Rensselaer instead sent its students out into the field to gather data; into the laboratory to perform experiments; and to the front of the classroom, to offer demonstrations to their professors and fellow students.

Today, the instruction here remains radically active—and you will find remarkable opportunities for project-based learning, for participation in our Undergraduate Research Program, for independent study, for study abroad, and for leadership.

Though we have very strong traditions, one of the greatest strengths of Rensselaer is its ability to reshape the education it has offered, in anticipation of the future.

In 1851, Benjamin Franklin Greene, our third Senior Professor and first Director, renamed the then-Rensselaer Institute, the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. “Polytechnic” means “many arts.” Professor Greene established departments of rhetoric and philosophy, and argued that our students should not just be taught technical proficiency—but also receive a “scientific, literary, philosophic, artistic” education.

The intent was to train the mind how to think, not what to think—which is an approach we embrace today. In a young country being transformed by new technologies—by trains, bridges, telegraphs, and photographs—Professor Greene made sure Rensselaer students were prepared to lead.

Today, the world is at another watershed moment—shaped by three factors:

First is the fact that the challenges we face are increasingly complex, interconnected, and global—including issues surrounding our food, water, and energy security; human health and the mitigation of disease; a changing climate; and the allocation and geopolitics of valuable natural resources.

The second great factor defining this moment is the consequent need to create graduates who are true global citizens and lifelong learners.

The third factor is the ubiquity of technologies that magnify the power of the individual, and that connect us in new ways. The avalanche of data generated by social media, by low-cost genome sequencing, and by the Internet of Things—with its smart phones, running shoes, automobiles, and biomedical devices—all equipped with sensors—offers us the raw materials for a new understanding of the world.

In fact, data can be considered as a great new natural resource. As with any resource, however, it is up to us to find ways to use it wisely.

Ultimately, key to this watershed moment is that its challenges, and its opportunities, are so great that they cannot be addressed by even the most brilliant person working alone, nor by a single discipline, sector, or nation.

Today, at Rensselaer, we speak of “The New Polytechnic”—a new way of envisioning the university, predicated on the absolute necessity of educating our students in multi-disciplinary and collaborative thinking—and bringing together researchers in many different fields—talented people across disciplines, sectors, and global regions—using advanced tools and technologies—to address great challenges.

What does this intellectual construct mean to our admitted students?

It means, simply, that Rensselaer is one of the most exciting places in the world to live and to learn.

Allow me to offer one example of The New Polytechnic in action: Clearly, one of the great questions all of us face is how to become more intelligent stewards of the environment.

With our partners IBM and The Fund for Lake George, in an undertaking we call The Jefferson Project, Rensselaer is using the fresh water ecology of Lake George, at the southeastern end of the Adirondack Park here in New York State, as a testing ground. We are turning Lake George into the “smartest” lake in the world, placing advanced sensors throughout the lake—including weather stations, tributary sensors, and vertical profilers that measure a panoply of factors and stressors. Advanced computation and graphics systems are helping us to integrate that data with high-resolution lake surveys—to help us to make predictions—to steer experimentation—and to guide efforts to protect the lake.

In our quest really to “see” Lake George, The Jefferson Project even includes people particularly adept at seeing: namely, visual artists, who are working with our biologists and computer scientists to capture, analyze, and model the distribution of plankton in the lake—the tiny, drifting creatures that form the base of the food web.

The wonders of this research will be presented through an immersive 3-D virtual environment artwork developed in conjunction with student artists, student sound designers, student game developers, and student programmers. Rensselaer, by the way, has one of the very best game design programs in the nation. Our Games and Simulation Arts and Sciences undergraduate program was ranked number 11 last month by the Princeton Review.

Ultimately, The Jefferson Project intends to protect the lake by using science to inform policy—and to offer insights into the protection of water resources around the world. No matter what your eventual major, you will have the opportunity to contribute to this great endeavor—and even to spend a semester at our Darrin Fresh Water Institute on Lake George studying and doing research. Our weeklong introduction to Rensselaer in late summer, Navigating Rensselaer & Beyond, offers the opportunity for an overnight trip to the Darrin, so you will not have to wait too long to experience both the remarkable setting and the remarkable work that takes place there.

Just as we strive to bring together different ways of thinking among the teams of human collaborators we gather at Rensselaer, we also are striving to bring together different kinds of thinking machines in order to address complex global challenges.

Almost two years ago, we created a university-wide initiative called The Rensselaer Institute for Data Exploration and Applications, or The Rensselaer IDEA, to pull together Rensselaer people and strengths in data science and web science, high-performance and cognitive computing, and immersive technologies—to enable more innovation, discovery, and unique teaching in every discipline.

Computers, indeed, are beginning to reflect the myriad ways that we humans perceive, learn, and discover—and at, Rensselaer, you will have the opportunity to learn on such tools—and to develop them further.

They include the most powerful supercomputer at an American private university, a petascale system whose acronym AMOS harkens back to our co-founder, Amos Eaton. They also include cognitive computing systems able to absorb tremendous amounts of natural language data, to make inferences from it, and to teach themselves. You may be familiar with the IBM cognitive computing system Watson, which, in 2011, was victorious over the best human champions in Jeopardy! We are very proud that many of the key figures in the development of Watson are Rensselaer alumni, and we were the first university to receive Watson for research.

The new tools being developed here even include robots, able to sense and reason, that can pass sophisticated tests of self-awareness. For example, told that it has been given either a pill that mutes it, or a placebo, a robot is asked which pill it has been given. Initially, it responds, “I don’t know.” Hearing itself, it realizes that it has not gotten the pill that renders it dumb, and answers correctly.

This robot’s intelligence—its reasoning ability—was developed right here at the Rensselaer Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory (RAIR Lab), which is directed by Professor Selmer Bringsjord, Head of our Department of Cognitive Science. Possibly you, too, have always dreamed of using a robot to explore what it means to be human. This is the place to do it.

Perhaps you are more of a hands-on, mind-on person. You will find remarkable makerspaces at Rensselaer, including the Douglas Mercer ’77 Laboratory for Student Exploration and Innovation, where you will get to tinker with electronic components, and the Manufacturing Innovation Learning Laboratory, or the MILL, where you will play and create with the most ingenious tools of advanced manufacturing, including advanced 3-D printing and robotics. We are in the process of creating a Global Challenge Studio that will offer students and faculty across the disciplines, working together, the chance to imagine, design, prototype, and test new technologies to solve pressing global problems.

Perhaps it is a love of pure science that has brought you here today, a fascination with the structure of the universe. Rensselaer Professor Heidi Newberg was part of the Supernova Cosmology Project team that turned scientists’ assumptions about the universe upside down, when they discovered that the expansion of the universe is accelerating, rather than slowing—due to a mysterious force counteracting gravity, which we now call dark energy. For this work, they shared the 2015 Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics. If you would like to join Professor Newberg in exploring the laws of nature, as they are written in the stars, you will have that chance.

Maybe instead, the mysteries of Washington, DC really intrigue you, because you are interested in the places where science and technology affect public policy. We have a fantastic Science, Technology, and Society program in our School of Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences that will prepare you to advance national policy and laws to encourage exploration, innovation, and entrepreneurship. Or possibility, you yourself intend to be one of those technological entrepreneurs. Our Lally School of Management specializes in teaching such mavericks—and helping them to launch their businesses.

Perhaps you are inspired by beautiful buildings and intend to design or engineer them. At our Center for Architecture, Science, and Ecology, an Institute-wide center, emanating from our School of Architecture, you will be able to contribute to research on future building materials—such as walls that incorporate plants and probiotics to filter the air and to promote human health. And if you want to participate in science- and technology-enabled art events, or to do research into human-scale immersive experiences, our Curtis R. Priem Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center, or EMPAC, offers a magnificent platform for such explorations.

And if you are just not sure what interests you just yet—a perfectly legitimate position!—I would urge you to consider Rensselaer a magnificent buffet, and to taste from our smorgasbord, and then decide.

Why do I talk so much about research with high school seniors, who are thinking about proms, or summer plans before you go off to college? Well, you are here today— thinking about where to spend your next four years. At Rensselaer, we always have viewed teaching and research as linked learning endeavors. So, you are being invited to participate in research, as undergraduates—and to experience remarkable innovations in teaching arising directly out of Rensselaer research.

For example, a multi-player, mixed-reality game we call The Mandarin Project helps Rensselaer students to learn Mandarin Chinese language by engaging them in conversation, and cultural immersion. With a compelling narrative in a game format that spans an academic semester, The Mandarin Project allows our students to expand their language skills in virtual environments that include the Beijing airport and a Chinese tea house—an approach, we have found, that accelerates learning. Very soon, we will have students interacting within these scenes with artificially intelligent digital characters that link to the cognitive computing systems I talked about earlier.

Another example of innovation in teaching and learning being developed at Rensselaer is Geo Explorer, a mixed reality and mobile game that teaches the design, testing, and inspection of flood protection systems. Geo Explorer is addressing one of the great challenges in engineering education: the fact that students are not—and cannot be—out in the field under extreme conditions, such as Hurricane Katrina, experiencing the practical consequences of engineering decisions. With Geo Explorer, however, they can experience those conditions and consequences virtually—and become better engineers for it.

You will find new ways of learning, and exciting academic options in emerging fields, in all of our schools, and you will learn more about them later this morning. You also will find initiatives across the entire curriculum that are designed to expand your horizons, such as Art_X@Rensselaer, which will expose you to the art in science and technology, as well as the science and technology in art.

If you—our admitted students—are beginning to sense that we intend for you to develop a holistic intelligence attuned to multiple ways of learning and thinking—you are correct. We also expect and push you to develop your collective intelligence—through a myriad of collaborative opportunities.

Given the many remarkable people we have gathered at the crossroads of The New Polytechnic—you are likely to find even the serendipitous, unplanned conversations you will have as you go about your day instructive, illuminating, and inspiring.

And you always will have a close-knit group of peers and advisors to turn to here. Our model of college life, CLASS, or Clustered Learning Advocacy and Support for Students, includes both residence- and time-based clustering to ensure that.

CLASS begins with Navigating Rensselaer & Beyond, which I mentioned a few minutes ago—a week of adventure, exploration, and familiarization before classes begin. It is part of our award-winning First-Year Experience, which will ensure that your Rensselaer careers are launched in ways that will help you to be successful, that will illuminate flexible academic pathways—even within a structured curriculum, and that will encourage you to meet and get to know each other.

CLASS offers opportunities for leadership as well as support, and will help to see yourselves as citizens of the globe. Through CLASS, we encourage all of our students to seize every opportunity for the ineffably transformative experience of study, research, an internship, or volunteer work abroad. Seventy percent of our School of Architecture students, for example, spend a semester in India, Italy, or China.

So, if you choose to attend Rensselaer (and we sincerely hope you do), you can expect to receive an education that is both deep and wide: You will acquire foundational proficiency in a particular domain – and you will develop intellectual agility to see across a myriad of domains. We will help you to make the important connections that encourage both multicultural sophistication and a global view—so that, like Rensselaer graduates before you, you are able to apply your skills fluidly in a wide array of situations, and to collaborate with people whose knowledge and perspectives are different from yours.

We have admitted you because we believe you truly are capable of changing the world. If—indeed, when—you join us, you, immediately, will be on a pathway to do just that.

We have high standards here, and great expectations for your future accomplishments. But, when we challenge you to change the world, we are challenging you to play, to make friends, to explore new perspectives, and to enjoy forging new connections between people and ideas. Rensselaer is a wonderful place to do all those things—to grow, and to learn to lead. It is a very special place.

Again, congratulations to all of you. I look very much forward to getting to know you better!

Thank you












Welcome, everyone. It is delightful to be here with all of you in this beautiful building designed by Stanford White at the beginning of the 20th century.

This evening, we will consider the 21st century, and the future of health care in the United States, and around the globe.

As Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute approaches the 200th anniversary of our founding in 2024, three factors have changed and clarified our mission to apply “science to the common purposes of life”:

First is the fact that the challenges we face are increasingly complex, interconnected, and global—including issues surrounding our food, water, and energy supplies; human health and the mitigation of disease; a changing climate; and the allocation and geopolitics of scarce natural resources.

The second great factor defining this moment is the consequent need to educate young people ready to collaborate across disciplinary and geographical borders, and to combine technical proficiency with intellectual agility.

The third factor is the ubiquity of technologies that magnify the power of the individual, and that connect us in new ways.

The avalanche of data generated by social media, by low-cost genome sequencing, and by the Internet of Things—with its smart phones, running shoes, automobiles, and biomedical devices—all equipped with sensors—offers us the raw materials for a new understanding of the world. In fact, data can be considered as a great new natural resource. As with any resource, however, it is up to us to find ways to use it wisely.

This is a watershed moment where our challenges, and our opportunities are so great that they cannot be addressed by even the most brilliant person working alone, nor by a single discipline, institution, sector, or nation.

What is required is The “New” Polytechnic: a new paradigm for teaching, learning, and research—the technological research university re-envisioned as a fresh collaborative endeavor across disciplines, sectors, and global regions. Such a university leads by using advanced technologies to unite a multiplicity of disciplines and perspectives, in order to take on large, multi-faceted challenges.

Guided by the original Rensselaer Plan, and now The Rensselaer Plan 2024, Rensselaer is being transformed into The New Polytechnic. One outcome of we have achieved in this regard is the affiliation, beginning slightly less than two years ago, of Rensselaer, a world-class technological research university without a medical school, and the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, a world-class medical school without a technological research university. We are very pleased to have Dr. Dennis Charney, the Dean of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, with us this evening.

Ultimately, Mount Sinai and Rensselaer will do—together—what neither one could do alone:

to realize the full promise of regenerative medicine;
to develop new therapeutics based on a molecular understanding of disease;
to make the goal of personalized medicine a reality;
to develop advanced medical devices and imaging tools;
to use advanced cognitive and immersive systems to improve decision-making in medicine; and
to educate physicians, scientists, and engineers for the future.
Our partnership has been inspired, in part, by other successful models of cross-institutional collaboration, such as The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, which is helping to establish and exploit the molecular basis of many diseases.

Our partnership, also, is the result of intelligent investments over the last 15 years at Rensselaer in biotechnology and the life sciences, with concomitant investments in world-class platforms such as the Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies—and in our remarkable computational ecosystem. Of course, our most important investments have been in people—especially our faculty, and our students.

At my inaugural ceremony back in 1999, I posed a few fundamental questions to help the entire Rensselaer community think about ways to move the Institute to the forefront of the world's great technological universities.

I asked that we consider the core strengths that Rensselaer could build upon in its research endeavor. I also asked that we consider this: “Are there areas that are so vital that we must create a presence in them—in order to stand in the community of world-class universities?”

We put an early stake in the ground in an arena in which Rensselaer was relatively unknown, but one that held such promise for humanity, that we were compelled to address it: biotechnology.

Both health care and agriculture already were being revolutionized by advances in the life sciences and bioengineering. Rensselaer could not afford to miss this moment, when looming large were new opportunities to develop more effective therapeutics and tools of diagnosis, to regenerate and engineer tissues, and to improve industrial processes and products using the tools and methods devised by that cleverest of all engineers—nature.
Admittedly, there were people at Rensselaer who worried, at the time, that in aspiring to influence within a new sphere, we might stretch ourselves too thin.

However, biology itself was being transformed as the visualization and manipulation of individual molecules, and indeed the genome, became increasingly important; and as the life sciences focused more and more on phenomena that could be mathematically described—and drew on an understanding of systems, on computation, on design-driven research.

It was not so much that Rensselaer was moving into biotechnology—as that biotechnology was moving towards Rensselaer—towards our history, our mission, our strengths, our ambitions for the future.

The Rensselaer Board of Trustees embraced this vision, and The Rensselaer Plan, approved in May of 2000, promised that we would make “dramatic investments” in biotechnology. They included over $100 million to build and to equip the Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, or CBIS, one of the world’s most advanced centers for biotechnology research—a dynamic and productive crossroads that brings together biologists, biochemical and biomedical engineers, chemists and materials scientists, physicists, architects, and many other experts across the disciplines.

As we had hoped, CBIS has expanded and revitalized the research enterprise of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Since 2000, Rensselaer research expenditures funded by the National Institutes of Health have increased nearly fourteen-fold. This research funding anchors overall sponsored research growth at Rensselaer from about $35 million per year in 2000 to approximately $100 million per year today.

The 40 resident faculty at CBIS and their students have published more than 2000 peer-reviewed papers in subject areas that include protein synthesis and manufacturing, regenerative medicine, biomaterials, and bioinformatics. This work has been cited in the scientific literature nearly 30,000 times. It has resulted in new classes of therapeutics to address threats to human health that include Alzheimer’s, osteoporosis, antibiotic-resistant bacteria, diabetes, and spinal cord injury and neurodegenerative diseases.

It is important to note that many of the investigations and discoveries arising within CBIS—and indeed, in the field of biomedicine as a whole—require sophisticated digital tools that are contributing to an explosion of medical data begging for interpretation. The genomics revolution alone is generating a staggering amount of data.

There also is the tremendous challenge of integrating data so it can be interpreted, including patient records from myriad disparate systems, genomic information, lifestyle information, streaming data from medical devices—information, even, about our microbiomes, or the microbes that have colonized us, which increasingly are implicated in health and disease.

Ten years ago, we invested in our Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies to address the great challenges in medicine. Today, our focus on improving human health is one significant reason we are investing in The Rensselaer Institute for Data Exploration and Applications, or The Rensselaer IDEA.

The Rensselaer IDEA brings together our strengths in web science, high-performance and cognitive computing, data science and predictive analytics, and immersive technologies—and links them to applications at the interface of engineering, and the physical, life, and social sciences.

The tools we use include the most powerful supercomputer at an American private university, a petascale IBM Blue Gene/Q system—which is an Advanced Multiprocessing Optimized System, whose acronym AMOS harkens back to our co-founder, Amos Eaton. AMOS is able to perform more than a quadrillion floating point operations, or mathematical calculations, per second.

Supercomputers like AMOS are particularly well suited to the modeling of very large or very intricate systems. At Rensselaer, our researchers are doing important work in protein folding—determining how, out of trillions of possibilities, a chain of amino acids, encoded by our genes, folds itself into the shape that determines its function as a protein. Misfolded proteins are implicated in a number of diseases, including Alzheimer’s.

However, not every problem in medicine takes such a form. Sometimes, the answer to a great question requires finding the single valuable insight within an unruly flood of non-mathematical data.

Cognitive computing—or computing by machines able to make inferences from data, and to teach themselves—add to our capabilities in another way. You may be familiar with the IBM cognitive computing system Watson, which, in 2011, was victorious over the best human champions in Jeopardy! Watson is able to absorb enormous amounts of natural language data—such as the 2.5 million scientific, technical, and medical papers published every year in peer-reviewed English-language journals, a flood of information with which no human doctor can keep up. Watson can find valuable correlations within that data, and generate hypotheses from it, for human experimentation and exploration. We are very proud that many of the key figures in the development of Watson are Rensselaer alumni, and that we were the first university worldwide to receive a Watson computer for research.

Now, our scientists are working to extend cognitive computing to the entire world of open data on the Web, to make these intelligent systems even more nuanced.

Researchers at Rensselaer also are investigating neuromorphic computing, or computing that mimics the architecture and function of the human brain, in order to gain some of the brain’s advantages, including extreme energy efficiency.

Neuromorphic computing also aspires to achieve the human ability to learn through one’s senses, as well as through one’s reason. Neuromorphic processors that mimic neurons and synapses are much more adept at analyzing sensory data than conventional processors. The potential applications in medicine are numerous, including hand-held diagnostic devices, and devices that assist the vision impaired.

Our scientists at The Rensselaer IDEA are exploring hybrids among all these types of computing—so that our endeavors can be assisted by a holistic intelligence more like our own.

Rensselaer researchers are improving not merely on machine perception—they also are devising new ways to assist human perception. Sometimes the best way to understand what the data is telling us is to see it, to hear it, or to feel it.

We have a magnificent platform for research into human-scale immersive technologies: Our Curtis R. Priem Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center, or EMPAC. We are in the process of developing, in partnership with IBM, The Cognitive and Immersive Systems Laboratory @EMPAC. Initially, this laboratory will focus on creating Situations Rooms—interactive environments that automatically respond to their occupants by listening to and watching them. A Situations Room will help collaborators working at the same time on different aspects of a larger project to make better decisions—such as all of the physicians involved in a patient’s care, working together within a cognitive medical diagnostics room.

The Rensselaer IDEA is helping biomedical researchers and physicians to find important insights within the enormous data sets we have access to through our partnerships, including those generated by the 2.6 million outpatient visits, 500,000 Emergency Department visits, and 170,000 inpatient admissions each year in the Mount Sinai Health System—as well as the claims data from 150 million de-identified patients provided through another partnership, with Optum Labs, a center for research established by Optum, an arm of UnitedHealth Group, and the Mayo Clinic.

This enormous trove of data gives Rensselaer and its collaborators the scope to consider even uncommon phenomena and rare diseases, and to realize the promise of personalized medicine. Given the slow approval process for new drugs, data tools can accelerate dramatically our ability to get targeted new treatments to patients at much lower costs, using compounds that already are approved.

I could go on about the exciting things happening at Rensselaer—but I prefer to introduce our two distinguished discussants, who will help us consider the promise of biotechnology and interdisciplinary investigations to transform medicine, and to improve human lives.

Dr. Dennis Charney is the Anne and Joel Ehrenkranz Dean of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and President for Academic Affairs of the Mount Sinai Health System. Dr. Charney was named Dean in 2004, and under his leadership, the Icahn School has risen to the top 20 institutions in National Institutes of Health funding, and it currently ranks fifth in research funding per faculty member.

Dr. Charney is an expert in neurobiology, who has made fundamental contributions to the understanding and treatment of mood and anxiety disorders, including the discovery of novel treatments for treatment-resistant depression.

He has written more than 700 scientific papers, book chapters, and books. He co-authored the 2012 book Resilience: The Science of Mastering Life’s Greatest Challenges, based on Dr. Charney’s research into the psychobiological mechanisms of human resilience to stress.

Dr. Charney earned his undergraduate degree at Rutgers College and his M.D. from Pennsylvania State University. He was elected to the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies in 2000. His scientific research has been honored with numerous major awards. He regularly is recognized as one of the “Best Doctors in America.” And he has improved many, many lives.

We are delighted and honored to have him with us.

Our second discussant, Dr. Jonathan S. Dordick, has served as the Vice President for Research of Rensselaer since September of 2012. He is the Howard P. Isermann Professor of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

Professor Dordick’s multi-disciplinary research group includes chemical engineers, bioengineers, materials scientists, biologists, chemists and microbiologists—who, together, use a quantitative understanding of biological principles to advance bioengineering, nanobiotechnology, drug discovery, and biomanufacturing.

Currently, his research focuses on enzyme structure and function at biological-material interfaces—including a novel strategy for combatting antibiotic-resistant bacteria; high-throughput drug and functional materials discovery; and large-scale bioprocessing.

Together with Dr. Robert Linhardt, our Ann and John H. Broadbent, Jr. ’59 Senior Constellation Professor of Biocatalysis and Metabolic Engineering, he has developed a scalable cost-efficient approach to producing bioengineered heparin.

Heparin is the most widely used, fast-acting anticoagulant drug worldwide—and currently derived, unsafely, from pig intestines. Much of the global supply of heparin comes from under-regulated farms and workshops in rural China, and, in 2008, deliberate adulteration killed 81 people in the United States alone. Just last week, Professors Linhardt and Dordick launched an industry-funded applied research center to accelerate the commercialization of safe, synthetic heparin. We are very proud of this groundbreaking research, which will benefit patients worldwide.

Professor Dordick received his undergraduate degree in Biochemistry from Brandeis University and his Ph.D. in Biochemical Engineering from MIT. He has published nearly 350 journal papers and holds nearly 40 patents related to his research. Among many other honors and awards, Professor Dordick last month was named a fellow of the National Academy of Inventors, and he just received the highest bioengineering honor from the American Institute of Chemical Engineers—the Food, Pharmaceutical and Bioengineering Award.

Please join me in welcoming them







It is a high honor to be invited to Vassar College to deliver the inaugural Pauline Newman ’47 Lecture. I thank the faculty in your distinguished multidisciplinary program in Science, Technology, & Society for this privilege.

Judge Newman is a pioneer—and not merely because she was one of the first female research chemists in American industry—as well as the first woman to be appointed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.

The arc of her career is utterly forward-looking, and I hope that all the students with us today take guidance and inspiration from it. Allow me to summarize: After graduating from Vassar College, Judge Newman earned a Ph.D. in Chemistry from Yale University. However, she found the experience of working as a research chemist in industry not entirely satisfying, and after a few years, she resigned her position and traveled to Paris for an adventure.

Upon returning to New York City, in definite need of employment, she accepted a position writing patent applications.

This was the kind of work, she has said, that was typically “done by either failed scientists or failed lawyers.” However, Pauline Newman was quite the opposite of a failure. Her interest piqued by her patent work, she attended law school, receiving an LL.B. from New York University School of Law, and became an expert in patent law and policy.

Eventually, she helped to persuade the U.S. Congress to create the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit—which has nationwide jurisdiction over international trade legal issues, government contracts, and patents, as well as other subjects—and in 1984, Judge Newman was appointed to that court. Her opinions in all these areas have been influential, and much admired for their fairness.

Hers has been an extraordinary career, but one with which we are familiar at Rensselaer, where a number of our alumni and alumnae have moved from science and engineering to become prominent figures in intellectual property law. They include the Chairman of the Rensselaer Board of Trustees, Judge Arthur Gajarsa, who received a Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical Engineering from Rensselaer in 1962, before studying economics and then the law. Judge Gajarsa served 15 years alongside Judge Newman on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. He says this about her: “She is brilliant, her opinions matter—even her dissents often being upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court—and she is a very nice person.”

As the President of Judge Gajarsa’s alma mater—the oldest private technological research university in the United States—I especially appreciate Judge Newman’s work in the field of intellectual property, which has guided the growth of technology-intensive industries.

In other words, Judge Newman used the insights and knowledge she garnered as a scientist to do incisive work in another sphere of influence, that of the law. In the process, she has helped to change the world around us, encouraging the movement of discoveries and innovations into the marketplace—towards the improvement of lives around the globe.

Increasingly, as Judge Newman did, it is critical that we draw on the perspectives of multiple disciplines—to gain a multi-dimensional view of the world—in order to make progress.

Today, we are at a watershed moment—one that requires a fundamental re-thinking and repositioning of the nature of pedagogy and research in the academy. Three factors lend some urgency to this.

First, the fact that the challenges we face are increasingly complex, interconnected, and global.

Second, the consequent need to create graduates who are true global citizens and true philomaths, while addressing questions many in our society have about the value of higher education.

Third, the rise and ubiquitousness of technologies that magnify the power of the individual, that connect us in new ways, while enabling collaborative endeavors not possible before.

Interestingly, a proper context for this required re-thinking is both historical and modern.  The historical context is framed by the original definition and purpose of the liberal (or liberating) arts, while the modern context derives from what today’s challenges demand, and what new technologies both drive and support.

Let us examine each of these factors in turn.

First—Interconnected global challenges.

This past January, I had the great privilege of attending the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2015 in Davos, Switzerland. Davos draws 1,500 of the most influential people in business in the world, as well as more than 300 heads of state and government leaders. From these leaders, I heard a great deal of concern about the stability of societies around the globe—given the threats we face at this moment.

These include, of course, new geopolitical tensions and the rise of radical non-state actors. They include climate change, pandemics and other health-related challenges, the global competition for natural resources, and growing income inequality in both developed and developing economies.

Each of these challenges impacts the others, and indeed, the survival of human civilization. Climate change, of course, exacerbates issues surrounding our food, water, and energy supplies. It also is likely to increase the spread of vector-borne diseases, such as malaria. It influences our national and global security. For example, vast reserves of petroleum, natural gas, and mineral wealth in the Arctic, made accessible by melting sea ice, are likely to be a source of new geopolitical tensions.

Climate change also is likely to worsen the inequalities between rich nations and poor ones, as it undermines food and water security at the lower latitudes. Even within a single geography, the risks of severe climate events are greater for those with fewer economic and educational advantages.

Vulnerabilities intersect!

Recent history shows us that when there is a triggering event, intersecting vulnerabilities can, and do, result in cascading consequences. Consider, for example, the Great Sendai Earthquake of 2011 in Japan—and the subsequent tsunami, with its destruction of electrical, transportation, and housing infrastructure, as well as loss of life—coupled with the meltdowns at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant, the resulting environmental contamination, the long-term risks of cancer from radiation exposures, as well as worldwide economic effects. The very interconnectedness of our systems and societies leaves us vulnerable to such domino effects.

Another example of interlinked complexities is the threat to global food security represented by Colony Collapse Disorder. In the U.S., Colony Collapse Disorder was first recognized when, in the fall of 2006, beekeepers began reporting dramatically high losses of their hives. The European honey bee is a key component of agriculture throughout the world. Fifty-two of the 115 leading global food crops depend on honey bee pollination for fruit or seed set. Eight and a half years after being recognized as a grave threat, the “cause” of Colony Collapse Disorder has not been fully determined. Researchers are concluding that Colony Collapse Disorder is likely caused by a multiplicity of factors including pathogens, parasites, stress factors in the management of bees—including beekeepers moving them great distances to pollinate different fields, and environmental stressors—including exposure to pesticides, even at sub-lethal levels. Again, this is a web-like challenge that cannot be properly addressed without expertise in fields that range from bee genetics, to data science, to agriculture and environmental policy.

Clearly, large, networked challenges such as these, and others, cannot be addressed by even the most brilliant person working alone, nor by a single discipline, sector, or nation. Collaborations on a grand scale are required, and colleges and universities, as we educate future leaders and convene brilliant scholars, have an obligation to seed, and to support, new approaches to teaching, learning, and problem-solving.

The second factor that creates urgency to redefine what we offer in higher education is the fact that, at this moment, there are more and more citizens, and even some thinkers in higher education, who question the value of a liberal education—indeed, of any form of higher education without immediate practical application in terms of jobs.  There are concerns about access and cost, completion/graduation rates, demonstrated educational outcomes for students, and—with the rise of online approaches such as MOOCs—even the continued benefits of a residential model of education.  These concerns must be addressed and rooted in what we value as a society, and how we see ourselves in the world.

Finally, the advent of remarkable new technologies, especially those enabled by advances in computation and artificial intelligence, not only support individual learning, but especially support multi-disciplinary collaboration in education and research. And, the avalanche of data generated by the Internet of Things—by everything from smart phones and cameras; to low-cost genome sequencing; to instrumented running shoes, automobiles and tractors, biomedical devices, watches—offers us the raw materials for a new understanding of the world.

In fact, data can be considered as a great new natural resource. But a resource is as a resource does.  What we do with any resource—what we do with data—matters. The students here today, no matter what field they enter professionally, almost inevitably will find themselves collaborating with experts in the tools of data collection and analysis.

Of course, the idea that higher education should freely cross and bridge disciplines—is not a new one. Vassar College, for example, has offered interdisciplinary courses for a century. Vassar also consistently has expanded its reach into emerging disciplines, such as cognitive science, where it was the first institution in the world to offer an undergraduate degree, and computer science, where it was one of the first liberal arts colleges in the nation to purchase a computer on which students could learn. Of course, we all know that Vassar is the alma mater of Rear Admiral Grace Hopper, one of the great pioneers of computer science.

Although the founding vision of my university was to educate young people in “the application of science to the common purposes of life”—and indeed, we retain our scientific and technological perspective in everything we do—we long have offered an education that is as panoramic, as it is tightly focused.

In 1851, Benjamin Franklin Greene, our third Senior Professor and first Director, renamed the then-Rensselaer Institute, the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. “Polytechnic” means “many arts,” and this change coincided with a radical broadening and deepening of the curriculum. Professor Greene established departments of rhetoric and philosophy, and argued that Rensselaer students should receive a “scientific, literary, philosophic, artistic” education, before they embarked upon their studies in “applied science or art.” As a result, Rensselaer students were educated—even then—for intellectual agility, as well as technical proficiency. In a young country being transformed by new technologies—by trains, bridges, telegraphs, and photographs—they were prepared to lead.

We are re-envisioning the meaning of polytechnic, within the context of modern challenges and opportunities, while drawing on the meaning and teaching of the original seven liberal arts of classical antiquity. They consisted of the Trivium—grammar, logic, and rhetoric—first taught together as foundational subjects in ancient Greece; and the Quadrivium—arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy. Arithmetic was about numbers; geometry—numbers in space; music—numbers in time; astronomy—numbers in space and time. The intent was to train the mind how to think, not what to think. The focus was on teaching the art and science of the mind, as well as the art and science of matter. This is not so different than what our educational intent is today.

Today, we speak of The “New” Polytechnic that supports promising areas of interdisciplinary research and learning, and which uses the most advanced tools and technologies to unite a diversity of perspectives. The New Polytechnic draws on the grammar (natural language processing), the logic, and the rhetoric of thinking machines (sentient digital agents), and of social networks. The New Polytechnic is predicated on the absolute necessity of educating our students in multi-disciplinary and collaborative thinking, and linking our researchers—in the arts, architecture, the humanities, the sciences, and the social sciences—as well as in engineering and the applied sciences.

As such, The New Polytechnic is a fresh collaborative endeavor across disciplines, sectors, and geographic regions, which serves as a great crossroads where talented people from everywhere meet, connect, and take on the hard problems. Engaged in by a broad spectrum of participants, guided by societal concerns and ethics, The New Polytechnic ultimately facilitates novel and effective approaches to global challenges.

History teaches us that no one can predict from which fields transformative ideas will arise—ideas that will change lives on grand scale. What we can do, in higher education, is to create the conditions for serendipity, by bringing together diverse groups, with a multiplicity of perspectives and disciplinary backgrounds.

Allow me to offer an example of The New Polytechnic in action. Until recent decades, the remarkable diversity of the microbial world was concealed from scientists, because so few species could be isolated from their environments—and their interdependent communities—in order to be cultured in a laboratory and studied. In fact, microbes are still so unexplored that they often are called “the dark matter of life.” However, with the advent of metagenomics—or the ability to sequence genes directly from an environmental sample—the curtain has been lifted on—as microbiologists like to say—who is there, and what they are doing.

The potential applications for this work in terms of human health are enormous. You may well have heard this interesting statistic: In the average human body, the number of bacteria alone that have colonized us represents ten times the number of human cells. Each of us serves as an ecosystem (like a microbial coral reef) for an astonishing and supple range of microbes—which varies over time, and varies among us, depending on factors that include environmental exposures. In fact, an imbalance in the diversity and composition of our microbiome is implicated in many diseases, including allergies, asthma, diabetes, obesity, and some cancers. To explore and exploit new tools and technologies in this arena, a very diverse group of Rensselaer faculty recently joined forces to create a Microbiome Informatics Team. They intend to lead in measuring, understanding, and even “engineering” microbial communities within the context of their environments and functions.

Just as metagenomics reveals microbial communities with many unexpected members, our Microbiome Informatics Team includes an array of experts that you might find surprising. Of course, it includes two microbiologists, Professor Karyn Rogers of our Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, who studies the relationship between the geochemistry of an environment and the microorganisms found there; and Professor Cynthia Collins of our Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, who studies microbial communities, and “engineers” them using synthetic biology.

Our Microbiome Informatics team also includes Architecture Professor Anna Dyson, who is the director of our Center for Architecture, Science and Ecology, where research is being done in next-generation building systems, including indoor environments that use consortia of plants and microbial communities to filter toxins and release probiotics.

The team also includes mathematician, Professor Kristin Bennett, to help identify patterns in the metagenomics and environmental data, and Professor Deborah McGuinness, our Tetherless World Senior Constellation Chair and Professor of Computer and Cognitive Science.

Professor McGuinness is developing web-based tools for integrating and exploring disparate geochemical and microbial datasets—to find the correlations within them. Professor McGuinness and others are part of a university-wide initiative we call The Rensselaer Institute for Data Exploration and Applications, or The Rensselaer IDEA. The Rensselaer IDEA brings together our strengths in web science, high-performance computing, data science and predictive analytics, and immersive technologies—and links them to applications at the interface of engineering, and the physical, life, and social sciences, in order to expedite scientific discovery and innovation.

And, significantly, our Microbiome Informatics effort includes two professors from our School of Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, who are cultural anthropologists—to offer a qualitative dimension to the findings of the group, and to help this diverse team cross barriers in language and practice that divide the disciplines. They are Professor Kim Fortun, whose research focuses on the ethnography of environmental problems, and Professor Michael Fortun, whose research focuses on the culture surrounding genomics.

Ultimately, the Microbiome Informatics Team intends to improve human health by determining which probiotics in the environment help to prevent diseases, by “engineering” microbial communities as alternatives to traditional pharmaceuticals, and by finding new targets for personalized medicine. This is how progress is made.

Just as we strive to bring together different ways of thinking among the teams of collaborators we gather at Rensselaer, we also are striving to bring together different kinds of thinking machines in order to address complex global challenges.

Computers, indeed, are beginning to reflect the myriad ways that we humans perceive, learn, and discover. As long as we are aware of the ethical questions their development and use may engender, such tools are a great cause for optimism.

At Rensselaer, we have the most powerful supercomputer at an American private university, a petascale IBM Blue Gene/Q system—which is an Advanced Multiprocessing Optimized System, whose acronym AMOS harkens back to our co-founder, Amos Eaton. AMOS is able to perform more than a quadrillion floating point operations, or mathematical calculations, per second. That is a thousand million million, or 10 to the 15th power, operations per second. It also has massive data storage capabilities.

Supercomputers are particularly good at the modeling of large systems, such as the climate of the earth—or very intricate ones, such as determining how, out of trillions of possibilities, a chain of amino acids, encoded by our genes, folds itself into the shape that determines its function as a protein.

However, not every problem takes such a form. The Senior Vice President who oversees the key growth units of IBM, including IBM Research worldwide, Dr. John E. Kelly III—who also is a Rensselaer alumnus and trustee—has dubbed the supercomputers of today “brilliant idiots.” They are excellent at performing the calculations they are programmed to do. But, unlike humans, they are not good at learning from experience and adapting to their environments, and they are not adept at finding the single valuable insight within an unruly flood of non-mathematical data.

Cognitive computing—or computing by machines able to make inferences from data, and to teach themselves—add to our capabilities in another way. You may be familiar with the IBM cognitive computing system Watson, which, in 2011, was victorious over the best human champions in Jeopardy! Watson is able to absorb enormous amounts of natural language data—such as scientific papers, kitchen recipes, or blog posts. It can find valuable correlations within that data, and generate hypotheses from it, for human experimentation and exploration. We are very proud that many of the key figures in the development of Watson are Rensselaer alumni—including Dr. Christopher Welty, who was a professor in the Computer Science Department at Vassar before joining IBM, and Google. We were the first university worldwide to receive a Watson computer for research.

Now, our scientists are working to extend cognitive computing to the entire world of open data on the Web, to make these intelligent systems even more nuanced.

On the screen, you can see another example of the work in artificial intelligence being done at Rensselaer. Cogito is a robot imbued with sensing and reasoning ability—whose “mental” capabilities were developed at the Rensselaer Artificial Intelligence & Reasoning Laboratory, which is directed by Professor Selmer Bringsjord, Head of our Cognitive Science Department. Cogito was created to study self-consciousness in machines. Given the classic “mirror test” used to measure self-awareness in animals and babies, Cogito is able to recognize itself in a mirror. If there is a mark on its forehead, Cogito understands that it does not belong there and decides on its own to remove it. Now Professor Bringsjord has moved on to a more sophisticated test of self-awareness. Told that it has been given either a pill that mutes it, or a placebo, a robot is asked which pill it has been given. Initially, it responds, “I don’t know.” Hearing itself, it realizes that it has not gotten the pill that renders it dumb, and answers correctly.

Researchers at Rensselaer, and elsewhere, also are investigating neuromorphic computing, or computing that mimics the architecture and function of the human brain, in order to gain some of the brain’s advantages.

In conventional computation, data is pulled from memory, processed, and then the result is sent back to storage before the next operation is addressed. This shuffling creates bottlenecks, tremendous excess heat, and is extremely expensive in terms of energy usage overall.

The human brain, on the other hand, has a networked architecture of neurons—the cells that transmit impulses—and synapses—the points between cells where signaling occurs—that allows the brain to distribute information processing in an extremely energy-efficient way. It has been estimated that for a conventional supercomputer to simulate the communication occurring at the 100 trillion synapses in the human brain—at the same speed as the brain—the combined power consumption of Los Angeles and New York City would be required. Our brains, on the other hand, currently are powered by the soup, salad, or sandwich we ate for lunch.

Neuromorphic computing also aspires to achieve the resilience of the human brain, which can lose neurons without compromising the entire system; has the ability to learn without being programmed; and has the ability to learn through our senses, as well as through our reason.

Neuromorphic processors that mimic neurons and synapses are much more adept at analyzing sensory data than conventional processors. This includes image processing, to determine, for example, which activity in a crowded airport terminal, transmitted by a camera, is cause for concern.

Our scientists at The Rensselaer IDEA are exploring hybrids among all these types of computing—so that our endeavors can be assisted by a holistic intelligence more like our own.

Rensselaer researchers are improving not merely on machine perception—they also are devising new ways to assist human perception. Sometimes the best way to understand what the data is telling us is to see it, to hear it, or to feel it. At Rensselaer, we are very focused on immersive technologies that enhance our sensory intelligence, including data visualization, haptics, and augmented reality.

We have a magnificent platform for this: Our Curtis R. Priem Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center, or EMPAC—which is not merely a remarkable place for the performing arts—but also is a locus of cutting-edge research in human-scale immersive technologies. We are in the process of developing, in partnership with IBM, The Cognitive and Immersive Systems Laboratory @EMPAC. Initially, this laboratory will focus on creating Situations Rooms—interactive environments that automatically respond to their occupants by listening to and watching them. A Situations Room will help collaborators working at the same time on different aspects of a larger project to make better decisions. Such a tool would have many applications, such as a cognitive design studio, a cognitive boardroom, a cognitive medical diagnosis room, or a cognitive classroom.

Collectively, these digital tools and technologies are so powerful, that they have applications in almost every field of human endeavor, and an important role to play in answering almost every question.

Allow me to offer a few examples. Over and over, in different parts of the world, in recent years, we have seen the rapid rise of new global security risks in non-state actors—as well as inspiring pro-democracy movements. How can we identify such movements in their infancy? How can we diffuse dangerous networks? How can we recognize when popular opinion is being swayed for positive ends?

Thanks to the digitization of so many communications between and among people, and the treasure trove of opinion, sentiment, gossip, and persuasion available on Twitter, Facebook, and Tumblr—a data-driven revolution is underway in fields such as sociology and psychology. This revolution is analogous to the transformation of the life sciences with the rise of genomics.

At Rensselaer, we host the Social Cognitive Networks Academic Research Center, or SCNARC. Directed by Dr. Boleslaw Szymanski, our Claire and Roland Schmitt Distinguished Professor of Computer Science, this is a collaboration among the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, IBM, Rensselaer, and a number of other universities. The Center seeks to understand, using the data available on social networks, how ideas and movements form, spread, influence, and create societies. It also examines cultural and linguistic nuance on such networks. This fascinating endeavor includes computer scientists, sociologists, psychologists, historians, political scientists, and linguists.

For example, Dr. Heng Ji, our Edward P. Hamilton Development Chair in Computer Science, is a theoretical linguist as well as a computer scientist. In her work with the Center, she is automating the recognition of hidden networks that use coded language, in societies in which it is dangerous to express oneself openly.

One of the early discoveries of SCNARC is the significance of commitment—and the fact that when 10% of a population truly is committed to an idea or cause, a tipping point can be reached—and the minority opinion is likely to be adopted rapidly by the majority. I am certain that there are many people in this Vassar audience who have dedicated their lives to societal concerns, or who will dedicate their lives to them. I hope you take courage from this finding that your convictions do have the power to change the world.

At Rensselaer, we also are using advanced digital tools to answer another key question: How can we become much more intelligent stewards of the environment?

With our partners IBM and The Fund for Lake George, we are using the fresh water ecology of Lake George, at the southeastern end of the Adirondack Park here in New York State, to model an answer to that question. We have named the undertaking The Jefferson Project, in honor of Thomas Jefferson, who declared Lake George to be “the most beautiful water [he] ever saw.” We intend to make sure that human encroachment does not cloud this famously clear water.

Lake George is best thought of as a system of systems, which include...

weather,
hydrology—in other words, runoff and the nutrients, sediments, and contaminants it introduces into the lake;
lake circulation; and
the food web, including invasive species.
In such a system of systems, easy correlations may not represent causation. To understand and mitigate stresses to the environment, scientific inquiry is required: careful observations over time using advanced technologies, models that help us to integrate the data streams they create and to make predictions, and experiments that allow us to test our hypotheses.

So, with our partners, we are turning Lake George into the “smartest” lake in the world. We have placed advanced sensors throughout the lake, including weather stations, tributary sensors, and vertical profilers that measure a panoply of factors influencing the lake. And we have established a new data visualization laboratory, at our Darrin Fresh Water Institute in Bolton Landing on Lake George, that features advanced computation and graphics systems to help us to integrate that data with high-resolution bathymetric and topographic lake surveys—and to develop a full picture of the systems and interactions that make up Lake George and its watershed.

In our quest really to “see” Lake George, the Rensselaer Office of Research has given seed funding to a project that includes people particularly adept at seeing: namely, visual artists. Professor Kathleen Ruiz, a new media artist whose work encompasses games and simulations, and Professor Kathy High, who produces videos and installations, are part of a project that includes Rensselaer biologists and computer scientists. Together, they are developing new technology, including a novel sensor, to capture, analyze, and model the distribution of plankton in the lake. Plankton are both a foundation of the food web and include invasive species, so they offer essential information about the health of the lake.

Professor Ruiz and Professor High will present the wonders of this research to a large audience by creating an immersive 3-D virtual environment artwork from it, using a team of student artists, sound designers, game developers, and programmers. The artists already have inspired our biologists to look at things differently by asking them “What do plankton look like in three dimensions?” This is quite different from considering these creatures in two dimensions—the way they might look mounted on microscope slides—and a small example of the serendipity that arises when one brings the arts and the humanities into scientific inquiry.

In the end, The Jefferson Project will inform and undergird public policy about watershed issues, fresh water systems, and overall environmental stewardship—where science, technology, ethics, regulation, and policy formulation all come together. This is precisely where and why interdisciplinary and multi-disciplinary approaches are critical.

Another key question we are addressing under The New Polytechnic is, how do we best educate young people for this new era of interconnected challenges and great tools of connection?

Helping to transform the academic experience at Rensselaer are teaching tools arising out of Rensselaer research into mixed and immersive realities, multi-player games, web science, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, computer vision, information technology management, and other fields. These tools allow us to explore exciting new ways of communicating knowledge, and of collaborating.

For example, a multi-player mixed-reality game we call The Mandarin Project helps Rensselaer students to learn the Chinese language in the most effective ways, through gamification, conversation, and cultural immersion in mixed reality environments. With an engaging narrative that spans an academic semester, The Mandarin Project allows our students to use and expand their language skills in virtual environments that include the Beijing airport and a Chinese tea house. We already have found that this approach accelerates student learning. And when our students go abroad, they will have developed, through direct and virtual experiences, cultural nuance that they otherwise would not have. Very soon, we will have students interacting within these scenes with artificially intelligent digital characters that link to the cognitive computing systems I talked about earlier.

Another example of pedagogical innovation at Rensselaer has been developed by Dr. Tarek Abdoun, the Thomas Iovino Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering and Associate Dean for Research and Graduate Programs. Professor Abdoun led the physical modeling research team that clarified the failure mechanisms of the New Orleans levees during Hurricane Katrina, and contributed to better levee designs. Now he and his colleagues are developing a game called Geo Explorer—a mixed reality and mobile game that is the cornerstone of an innovative hybrid course module combining theoretical flood protection system design, the virtual planning and inspection of flood protection systems, actual laboratory testing, and virtual field testing. Geo Explorer is intended to help address one of the great challenges in engineering education: the fact that students are not—and cannot be—out in the field under extreme conditions, experiencing the practical consequences of engineering decisions. With Geo Explorer, however, they can experience those conditions and consequences virtually—and become better engineers for it.

At Rensselaer, we bring a scientific and technological perspective to all we do. But we make sure that that perspective is informed by ethics and societal concerns—and the humanities and social sciences bring these issues to the fore for our students.

To drive home what the true interdisciplinarity is, we have Art_X@Rensselaer—a new initiative designed to expose all of our students to the science in art, and the art in science, so that they can recognize the underlying patterns of thought that are common across the disciplines—and be inspired to embrace creative crossover. Art_X@Rensselaer is not about art appreciation classes. Instead, we are promoting an awareness of beauty and creativity throughout the Rensselaer curriculum, and through the many opportunities we offer our students for collaborative research across art, science, engineering, the social sciences, and management—and through work on projects and productions, such as the immersive plankton experience I mentioned a few moments ago.

Clearly, it is crucial for institutions of higher education, such as Vassar and Rensselaer, to put into place the mechanisms for multi-disciplinary learning and research, such as the Science, Technology, & Society program that is hosting me today.

However, we make an equally important contribution simply by serving as a physical crossroads—where scientists, engineers, artists, and scholars from diverse disciplines, meet, talk, and spark the innovations and discoveries that can improve lives around the world. This both undergirds and validates the residential collegiate model. I would urge every student in the audience today to take full advantage of the delightful intellectual bazaar in which you find yourselves—and to seek out people in majors far removed from your own, just for a conversation.

Before I end today, I would like to consider another thought from Judge Newman, in explaining her own journey from one discipline, into another, where she made an indelible mark. I quote her: “The law seemed to summon the same parts of my mind that had attracted me to the sciences years before.”

I have spoken today about summoning our collective intelligence to address great challenges, as well as about encouraging both students and faculty to develop a more holistic intelligence by learning from people in other disciplines.

Of course, there is no single settled definition of intelligence, any more than there is a full understanding of the remarkable human brain that generates intelligence. However, the brilliant people around us remind us that there are many ways to accomplish great things: that we may summon analytic abilities to define problems and solutions; creativity to imagine new paths; organizational ability to help make a project real; and wisdom to guide us—arising from our experience of life and our sense of goodwill towards the world at large.

While each of us has all of these capabilities in some measure, very few of us have developed all of them in equal measure. It is when we join forces that we truly cancel out our weaknesses and compound our strengths. To solve great problems, we must connect.

I hope that I have convinced you that, with the new tools and technologies we have, what they enable, and with the conjoining of multidisciplinary perspectives they allow—we are educating our students within a modern definition of the liberal arts —The New Polytechnic. The intent is to engender in our students intellectual agility, multicultural sophistication, and a global view—characteristics they must have if they are to lead in a changing world, indeed, lead in changing the world.

Thank you










Welcome, everyone. Thank you for coming. Greetings to our colleagues watching in Hartford, and to those who are watching us online.

This past January, I had the great privilege of attending the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2015 in Davos, Switzerland. While Rensselaer has some influence on the conversation in Davos, in that I serve on the World Economic Forum Science Advisory Committee, as well as on the board of the World Economic Forum USA—Davos is a very interesting place to gather information, as well as to impart it. It draws 1,500 of the most influential people in business in the world, as well as more than 300 heads of state and government leaders.

From these leaders, I heard a great deal of concern about the stability of societies around the globe, given the threats we face at this moment. These include, of course, new geopolitical tensions and the rise of radical non-state actors such as ISIS, climate change, pandemics, the potential exhaustion of limited natural resources, and growing income equality in both developed and developing economies. There was some debate as to whether technology is exacerbating such inequalities.

Those concerns underscored the significance of the work all of us do here—as faculty, staff, and students—within the paradigm of The New Polytechnic. We work to engineer resilience into human civilization by bringing together talented people across the disciplines, and by supporting them with new technologies and tools, so that they can address complex and interconnected global challenges.

Please allow me to acknowledge the members of my cabinet, who support the larger Rensselaer community in changing the world:

Prabhat Hajela, Provost
Charles Carletta, Secretary of the Institute and General Counsel
Elisha Mozersky, Chief of Staff
Jonathan S. Dordick, Vice President for Research
Virginia Gregg, Vice President for Finance, and Chief Financial Officer
John Kolb of the Class of 1979, Vice President for Information Services and Technology, and Chief Information Officer
Karen S. Long, Acting Vice President for Enrollment, and Acting Dean of Undergraduate and Graduate Admissions
Curtis Powell, Vice President for Human Resources
Claude Rounds, Vice President for Administration
David L. Brond, Vice President for Strategic Communications and External Relations
Graig R. Eastin, Vice President for Institute Advancement.
Please allow me, also, to recognize our academic deans:

Dean Evan Douglis of The School of Architecture
Dean Shekhar Garde of the School of Engineering
Dean Mary Simoni of the School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences, or HASS
Dean Thomas Begley of the Lally School of Management
Dean Curt Breneman of the School of Science.
And, of course,

Linda Schadler, Vice Provost and Dean of Undergraduate Education, and
Stan Dunn, Vice Provost and Dean of Graduate Education.
It is due to the success of their efforts, as well as the efforts of many people in the audience today, that so many talented young people aspire to come to Rensselaer to study and to conduct research. Thus far, our undergraduate applications number 17,713. We are tracking just slightly behind the record high of last year, and there may well be demographic factors at work, as a projected decline in the number of high school graduates nationwide is underway. However, more students have committed to Rensselaer through the early decision process, and their SAT quality has risen.

We currently are 3.4% ahead of last year in the number of graduate applications, with 5.8% more applications from women and 6.6% more applications from underrepresented minority students than last year.

Just this week, U.S. News & World Report released its annual rankings of graduate schools. The School of Engineering at Rensselaer was ranked 39th in the nation. I am pleased to report that within the school, six graduate programs—in aerospace engineering, chemical engineering, industrial engineering, materials science engineering, mechanical engineering, and nuclear engineering— were ranked among the top 25 nationwide.

At its meeting on March 7th, the Rensselaer Board of Trustees approved a budget for Fiscal Year 2016 that will enable us to concentrate our energy and resources on the core research and teaching activities that are central to our mission and purpose.

The overall operational budget is $396.9 million.

Tuition for full-time undergraduate and full-time graduate students will be $48,100, an increase of 3%. On average, room and board rates will increase 3.5 percent.

At the same time, the financial aid budget will be increased 9.3% from the current-year level, to $114 million. Included in this are resources to assist those students who encounter unexpected financial hardships during their time at Rensselaer.

The minimum academic year stipend for graduate students remains $18,500.

We are developing guidelines for faculty and staff performance management and compensation, and we will continue to actively manage staff attrition to achieve savings.

In Fiscal Year 2016, faculty hiring will continue. We will fill the remaining tenured and tenure-track faculty positions anticipated in the Fiscal Year 2015 budget, as this year’s faculty hiring plan is finalized. We will accelerate the search for the Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine (TERM) Constellation, and initiate the search for the Cognitive and Immersive Systems Laboratory Constellation. We also will continue a faculty renewal hiring plan for Fiscal Year 2016.

Assisting us with the resources to accomplish all of our goals, the Division of Institute Advancement will launch the second Pi Day Giving Challenge at midnight tonight. The challenge will end at 9:26 a.m. on Saturday, March 14th—a time that could be digitized, appropriately, as 3.1415926.

Last year, Pi Day was a great success, persuading a record 819 donors to contribute to our Annual Fund in a single day.

This year, we are seeking to inspire 400π—or 1,256—alumni, alumnae, parents, friends, students, faculty, and staff to contribute. Once again, several alumni and alumnae have offered to make generous donations as we reach certain milestones tomorrow. The details will be provided as the day unfolds, so please be sure to follow the Rensselaer Alumni Association on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, or SnapChat. I encourage you to visit rpi.edu/pi to learn more.

As The New Polytechnic, we are focused on being transformative in our research, in our innovative pedagogy, and in the lives of our students. I will offer just a few examples of the ways we are moving forward in each realm.

Let us begin with research. With the launch of The Rensselaer IDEA, and new partnerships, such as that with IBM and The Fund for Lake George in The Jefferson Project, as well as our affiliation with the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, we are animating The New Polytechnic with new multi-disciplinary collaborations.

We promote an enlivening intermingling of different ways of thinking—even among the thinking machines in our remarkable computational ecosystem. These include our petascale supercomputer AMOS, the largest at an American private university, with immense speed that allows it to perform more than a quadrillion floating-point operations—or mathematical calculations—per second. This makes AMOS a particularly remarkable tool for modeling and simulations—such as determining how, out of trillions of possibilities, a linear chain of amino acids, encoded by our genes, folds itself into the three-dimensional shape that determines the function of a protein. Understanding protein folding—and misfolding, which is implicated in diseases such as Alzheimer’s—has been called the most important problem in biochemistry.

The remarkable Watson cognitive computing system extends our capabilities in another way. Its ability to process natural language information, and to draw inferences from it, allows Watson to find the correlations within massive amounts of unstructured data, and to generate new hypotheses based on it.

Now, our researchers are investigating neuromorphic computing, or computing that mimics the architecture and function of the human brain, in order to gain some of the brain’s advantages, including its remarkable energy efficiency, resiliency, and ability to learn without being programmed. Neuromorphic processors that mimic neurons and synapses are particularly adept at processing perceptual data—such as determining which activity in a crowded airport terminal, transmitted by a camera, is cause for concern.

Exploring what a hybrid of different types of computing would look like, Professor Chris Carothers, Director of our Center for Computational Innovations, and Professor Jim Hendler, Director of The Rensselaer IDEA, recently received a large grant from the United States Air Force Research Laboratory to investigate ways that AMOS could model neuromorphic processors, in order to learn to optimize its energy use—and to explore input from data-sensing systems.

Rensselaer researchers are improving not merely on machine perception—they also are devising new ways to assist human perception. A new partnership with IBM is yielding the Cognitive and Immersive Systems Laboratory@EMPAC—or CISL. Initially, CISL will focus on creating Situations Rooms—immersive, interactive, reconfigurable environments that automatically respond to their occupants by listening to and watching them. A Situations Room will help collaborators working at the same time on different aspects of a larger project to make better decisions. Such a tool would have many applications, such as a cognitive design studio, a cognitive boardroom, a cognitive diagnosis room, or a cognitive classroom.

I would like to mention one more research initiative designed to bring together the perspectives offered by different disciplines, to address the great challenges: We have initiated a new Knowledge and Innovation Program, or KIP—in which the Office of Research offers seed grants to researchers across Rensselaer—with the requirement that faculty from either HASS or Lally be among the collaborators, to ensure that a socioeconomic or an artistic point of view adds to the significance of the project.

One of the first of four KIP projects, growing out of The Jefferson Project at Lake George, is a collaboration between Professors Rick Relyea and Sandra Nierzwicki-Bauer of the Darrin Fresh Water Institute and our Department of Biological Sciences; Professor Chuck Stewart, head of the Department of Computer Science; and Professors Kathleen Ruiz and Kathy High of our Department of the Arts. Together, they will develop new technology to capture, analyze, and model in three dimensions the distribution of plankton in a body of water.

Bringing the perspective offered by artists into the work of The New Polytechnic is something we do in our pedagogy as well as our research. Our new Art_X@Rensselaer initiative exposes our students to the science in art, and the art in science, so they can recognize the underlying patterns of thought that are common across the disciplines—and be inspired to embrace creative crossover. Art_X@Rensselaer is not merely about art courses. We will promote such thinking throughout the Rensselaer experience, in the new core curriculum we are developing, in existing courses, and in co-curricular activities that include research and production residencies at EMPAC.

We also are preparing our students to become more data literate with an initiative that we call Data Analytics Through Undergraduate Mathematics, or DATUM. Beginning initially with mathematics students, but soon to be extended to other majors in the School of Science, DATUM incorporates the fundamentals of data analytics into the mathematics instruction we offer those students as freshmen, so that they are prepared to build upon that knowledge in upper division courses.

We also continue to move forward with innovative means of teaching and learning arising out of Rensselaer research, including multi-player, mixed reality classes, and cyber-enabled learning and discovery. At Rensselaer@Hartford, blended learning—both online, and in the classroom and laboratory—will offer working professionals a way to combine full lives with advanced professional studies, including new certificate programs, as well as degree programs better aligned with those offered on our Troy campus.

We also intend to capitalize on the success of our Virtual Calculus Bridge for incoming freshmen who need a little more preparation in mathematics. First offered in the summer of 2014, it combines a residential component with an on-line course over the summer, and follow-up support programming during the academic year. Similarly, we will create a Virtual Physics Bridge to combine online learning with a dynamic classroom experience for experimentation and problem-solving.

As you know, we intend to be transformative, not merely in the ways we teach, but in the lives of our students as a whole. Towards that end, we offer panoramic support to our students, programming to help them grow as people, as well as opportunities for leadership. Now, a five-year, $1.2 million grant from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute designed to increase retention in the STEM majors is enabling us to offer all three simultaneously. Building on our successful Math Mentor program, in which upperclassmen take on small groups of first-year students and help them through Calculus 1, we are expanding this support to two other foundational courses that many of our students encounter as freshmen: General Chemistry 1, and Physics 1.

We are continuing to improve the graduate student experience—and to help forge those connections at the heart of our vision of The New Polytechnic—by increasing student engagement with our faculty, and by expanding the number of graduate students living in university housing, allowing them to take advantage of the residential programming available to them.

Of course, the connections we hope to encourage with The New Polytechnic extend beyond the Rensselaer community, to include talented people across the globe. The honorands who will come to the Troy campus for the 209th Commencement of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute demonstrate our power to convene remarkable people from other institutions and other sectors.

I am delighted to announce that we will be awarding an honorary doctorate of Humane Letters degree to Dr. Henry Louis Gates, Jr., the Alphonse Fletcher University Professor and Director of the Hutchins Center for African & African American Research at Harvard University. Dr. Gates is a distinguished cultural critic, scholar, filmmaker, and author of 17 books. He also may be familiar you to you as the executive producer and presenter of the current PBS series Finding Your Roots, in which he brings history to life by helping prominent people in many fields trace their ancestry. Dr. Gates won an Emmy Award for the 2013 PBS documentary series The African Americans: Many Rivers to Cross.

We will bestow an honorary doctorate of Engineering on Craig J. Mundie. He is an expert in cybersecurity and a member of the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. As the Chief Research and Strategy Officer for Microsoft, Mr. Mundie spent 15 years as the principal technology policy liaison of the company to over 200 governments worldwide. He often was called the “Secretary of State” of Microsoft.

We will bestow an honorary doctorate of Humane Letters on David M. Rubenstein, who is co-CEO and co-founder of The Carlyle Group, one of the largest private equity firms in the world. Mr. Rubenstein is one of our nation’s greatest philanthropists, donating to health care causes that he feels are not getting enough attention, to higher education—and to national collections and monuments, a form of “patriotic philanthropy” designed to repay the United States for creating the conditions that allowed him to succeed.

Finally, we will be awarding an honorary doctorate of Engineering to Admiral Michelle J. Howard, who is the 38th Vice Chief of Naval Operations. She is the first African American woman to command a U.S. Navy ship, and the first woman four-star admiral in U.S. naval history. And for those of you who saw the Academy Award-nominated movie Captain Phillips—Admiral Howard was just three days into a new position as commander of a counter-piracy task force, when the cargo ship of Captain Richard Phillips was hijacked by Somali pirates. It was she who planned and led the successful rescue mission depicted in the film. Admiral Howard will be our Commencement speaker.

We also look forward to a very thought-provoking conversation with our honorands at the President’s Commencement Colloquy, which will be held on Friday, May 29 at 3:30 p.m. in the Curtis R. Priem Experimental Media and Performing Arts Center Concert Hall.

I hope to see all of you there. And now, I would be pleased to answer any questions
